## TOPIC: NEIGHBORHOODS

Q: Incoming Transfer - Off Campus Housing Advice — Hi!  I’m an incoming transfer student at NYU this fall and am trying to figure out off campus housing. I’m hoping to move in sometime in late August and am looking for a private room.  My budget is ideally around $1,300 (or below) though I could probably stretch to $1,400 ($1,550 if utilities are included).  Ofc I’d love to stay under though (I’m sure that’s a common sentiment with students lol). I’ve been keeping an eye on the NYU off campus housing website and a bunch of Facebook groups, but most of what I’m seeing right now are summer sublets and June/July start dates.  For anyone who’s gone through this before (or just anyone with advice): - is it normal that there aren’t many August/September listings yet?  Or do I need to be jumping on those few listings bc they’re rare? - when do most fall listings start showing up? - at what point should I start seriously worrying (panicking) if I haven’t found something yet? - are there any specific Facebook groups, websites, resources that were especially helpful? - any neighborhoods you’d recommend I look at (or stay away from) as an NYU student trying to balance commute, safety, and affordability?  I’m also a music business major so artsy/music oriented neighborhoods are definitely a plus, but not a requirement.  I’m hoping to stay within a 45 minute commute or so max. - is it generally better to join an existing apartment/lease or find other people and apartment hunt together? I’m doing all of this from Virginia, so seeing apartments and hunting in person is a bit difficult for me.  Any advice from people who found housing from out of state is also especially helpful!!  Thanks for all the help!! Most landlords don’t hold an apartment for more than a few weeks. If you’re moving in August, the first realistic showing schedule is probably in July. Never sign a lease without actually seeing the place. There are many scammers out there. You also want to see the actual condition of your unit and the surrounding area. The housing market moves fast. Have your documents ready and be prepared to apply right after the showing. Most affordable places are in the market for only a few days at most. More resources here: https://offcampushousing.nyu.edu/resources
A: People typically use Street Easy to find apartments in New York.

Q: NEED HELP - CAS ECON JUNIOR TRANSFER (SO MANY QUESTIONSSS) — Hiiii, I will be a junior transfer from a UC school. I applied to stern, obviously didn't get in but did get into CAS econ + CS. I am so many questions as this is going be a big decision. Have no family or friends there. - I'm interested in finance/consulting/PM — is it realistic to break into Stern clubs as a CAS junior or is that a waste of time? - Is on-campus housing actually worth it or do most upperclassmen live off campus? If off campus, what neighborhoods are realistic on a budget? - How hard is it to make friends as a junior transfer? - Is there anything else I should know before i commit? I am really scared and don't know what to do. Looking for some guidance... (THANK YOUUU) If it’s the learning you’re pursuing rather than the position, then by all means you can be a general member of almost all Stern clubs.
A: I’ll answer your question about the Stern clubs. Even for Stern juniors, it’s very unrealistic to break into Stern clubs. Matter of fact, even for Stern sophomores, it’s extremely difficult to break into Stern clubs. Unfortunately, so much is decided during freshman year, which is part of why the school is so competitive.
A: breaking into stern clubs as a junior is tough but not impossible if you bring something unique. most upperclassmen live off campus - check out east village or lower manhattan for cheaper spots. making friends as a junior transfer takes effort but join a club or two and go to everything the first month. one thing i wish i knew: the career center is actually helpful if you book early. you got this just take it one step at a time.
A: I'm a junior transfer as well so I'm curious too.
A: Kinda of in the same boat as you, Im transferred in as sophmore though. Stern was my goal, but Im considering Econ if it will get me in quant trading. I'm also wondering if I'll get same/similar opportunities as stern at CAS econ. I have the same questions as youuuu AHHHH LMK or please update if you get more information!!
A: “NYU junior transfer decisions genuinely feel like choosing between ‘this could change my life’ and ‘this could financially/emotionally destroy me’ 😭 also trying to break into finance from CAS while everyone online acts like Stern is the only path sounds insanely stressful. The ‘how do I make friends as a transfer in NYC’ anxiety is so real too because everyone else already seems pre-installed with friend groups 💀”

Q: NYU ACCOMMODATION? 🏠 — Hi guys, I’m an incoming **international student** at NYU for the 2026–2027 academic year. I’ve never lived in a big city like NYC before, so my initial plan was to stay on-campus since it seems convenient and close to everything downtown. That said, the cost is pretty high and I didn’t get a full ride, so I’ve been seriously considering **living off-campus** (maybe 30–45 minutes away by subway) to save money. My main concern is whether commuting daily is actually manageable with a demanding school schedule. I also have a friend currently at NYU who strongly recommended living on-campus, mainly because of how easy it is to access classes and facilities. As a law student, I’d likely be in **D’Agostino Hall** or **Hayden Hall**, so I’d really appreciate any insights or experiences from people who’ve lived there (or chosen to commute instead). **TL;DR:** Is on-campus housing at NYU worth it? And in what way u connect with ur current roommates? I’m an international student barely knew no one, should I post one on Reddit for someone who wants co-living? - Flatmates in my same field, program, university - Place that is in front of the subway line that I can go directly to NYU Tandon and that is the nearest to it (that way rainy, snowy days or coming to home very late would not be a problem or unsafe) - Made some living guidelines of cleaning/noise time/party and check if roomates would agree before choosing them - Place where heat was included (it can be very very expensive if not) - Subway station that has elevator or not so many stairs (there are some stations without elevator that you have to go up 4 stair floors, it is too much if I need to carry luggage or even heavy backpack daily) - If a place had a longer commute to univ, I would look for a place with just one trainuniversity commute (so I can read and do my own things during the commute). For example, you can look near 125-127th A line in west Harlem, that has express line
A: Hey can you guide me through it as I am an incoming international student at NYU tandon for mscs and I am not able to find anyone so that we can discuss and browse for houses.
A: Hi! Send a dm so I can share the WhatsApp groups that I found nyu roomates
A: Hiii, glad to reach out. Seeing u got a so economic rate of $750, how did u make it and what website u recommend if I want to rent one like this! I’m going to Tandon for mscs this fall! So really need this information:)
A: I never lived on campus, I am a PhD student (short scholarship) at Tandon, so I live in brooklyn just with less than 25 min commute, with flatmates, and pay $750. All depends of your budget and the experience you want to have. Something I tried to pay attention when looking for a place:
A: I commuted nearly an hour each day and tbh it was fine.

Q: Off campus housing — Decided to go off campus next semester but don’t know head or tail of the process.. I’m not sure where to start? What’s the timeline like generally? What do I need to do? If you believe this to be a mistake, please message the moderators for secondary review. My more subjective advice is that laundry in unit and dishwasher are worth paying more for or living a bit further away for. Focus less on distance and more on commute time and transit availability (multiple options is always best – even if the apartment is super close to one line, what happens when that line is delayed or suspended?). Check online for any building code violations or complaints filed. Check water pressure and open cupboards and cabinets to check for signs of pests. If you have or want a pet, check the pet policy - not just whether they're allowed, but whether there's a pet rent charge. Explore the area around the apartment to make sure it has the things you need (e.g. grocery stores). Be weary about any "advice" you get on particular neighborhoods; NYC neighborhoods are constantly changing, and many people have outdated ideas about which ones are "safe." On that note, visit the area at night if you can.
A: Your post was removed for containing spam or advertisements.
A: Streeteasy is your friend. You probably shouldn't use a broker, you don't need it and it'll just be a hefty extra fee. The market moves extremely fast here so you're not going to find anything more than a month out in most cases. It's kind of a gruelling experience lol but worth it (nothing against housing, it's just nice to have your own space). Be prepared to pay first month's rent plus a security deposit (usually the same amount as rent) up front. If there's an application fee (very common), don't spend more than $20; it's illegal to charge more than that, but lots of places will still try. If you find a place you really like, get your application in the day you visit, because everything goes FAST.
A: As you look for a house, I hope you get the best one near campus. Also, I am an academic writer and data analyst and I can help you handle your class assignments including essays, quizzes, and tests with ease. I always deliver quality and flawless work, free from AI and plagiarism at a cost friendly price. Kindly shoot me a DM, thank you.
A: If you’re willing to move in now sure but they’re not renting now for a August move in
A: Why not now? Wouldn’t brokers wanna get it out of the way now too?
A: Start looking on street easy starting in July if you’re looking for an August move in

Q: Just got accepted into NYU but as a transfer student im apparently not gauranteed housing :( — So I have untill April 22cnd to commit and May 1st for rutgers. If I commit to NYU then I will miss the oportunity to go to rutgers and there saying theres no gaurantee ill have a room even though i have an accomdation letter from my therapist saying "student requires on campus housing." Im looking at off campus housing options as a backup but EHS is so expensive for me. I have no money and i wont be able to come up with enough money which is 5,100 to reserve your room. Im looking at apartmentscom as well but its going to be hard living with people that may or may not be students. I dont know if im comfortable with that. I dont know what to do and how to have a good backup plan for housing for NYU. Can I maybe take out a private loan right now for the deposit ? Any advice would be much appreciated. Paying like 1750 Per month for A Double Compare this to rutgers, which does have on campus housing, but which has a much larger and spread out campus, meaning that even if you live on one of the campuses, you are likely to need to travel between them to get to you classes, which is at least a 20 minute bus ride anyway. Also, as a slight nonsequitor, the nyu area is actually safer than rutgers. There are way more muggings at and around the rutgers area. Yet another appeal, NYU is just a better school.
A: unrelated but when did you submit ur application?
A: liberal arts schools have gauranteed housing ...why anyone goes here for undergrad is beyond me
A: I asked them about emergency grants and they said max would be 500$ :(. How exactly did they give you 2k and who did you talk to ?
A: Hey thanks for the reply ! When did you ask them for emergency housing grants ? Like in the springtime April/may or in the summer.
A: It depends on what location are you in for turtle bay I am
A: So, the thing about NYU is that there really isn't any on campus housing to begin with (partially because there isn't a campus in the traditional sense). All of the university housing is spread out along lower Manhattan, ranging from SoHo to gramercy. Because of this, many dorms essentially require you take the subway anyway. This isn't a real issue though because NYC has such a robust public transportation network. So long as you're below 42nd street, Washington Square is at most 30 minutes away (and frequently much less). Also, once you are at Washington Square, all of your classes are at most a 5 minute walk from each other due to the nature of really tall buildings.
A: FOUND is for students all over NYC, not just NYU - just to be clear. The price is due to its location in midtown and the niche it fills (commuting is not difficult though). I was lucky enough not to have to take out a loan.
A: hey the prices on FOUND are pretty high for being 20 minutes away from campus. Did you have the money or did you have to take out a private loan for it

Q: Off-campus housing — Hi, 1. Is off-campus ok for a summer semester (Manhattan)? 2. How to go about finding the short term summer semester accommodation? 3. Is it too early to go off-campus for Fall of Sophomore year? Yes, some good friendships and network has been established in the freshman year and its great to be on-campus. But just exploring the off-campus thing.. 4. Is it really cheaper to be off-campus? 5. Any website recommendation for apartment hunting? 6. Which area in Manhattan the most cost-effective? What is the average rent to expect for an apartment near the Washington square park area? I will have a roommate.. Can i still sign up for a meal plan if i decide to be off campus? 2. You have to find a sublet. Check some old posts there’s recommendations for Facebook groups you can join to find a sublet. 3. No plenty of people do, but of course you don’t have access to dorm activities. 4. It really depends where you live and how nice of a place it is. 5. Street Easy is the only place 6. It really depends on your budget. But regardless of budget the West Village and Soho are the most expensive so avoid.
A: 1. If you’re asking if you can go off campus for the summer, yes.

Q: How do people get housing accommodations? — This is the second year I’ve applied for singles and they rejected me both times 😭 I have diagnosed mental health disorders/ disabilities which make it difficult for me to have a shared sleeping/ living space. And I know it’s not an issue with the roomate’s I’ve had since they have been as accommodating as they can be, it’s living with another person in the same space in general that’s difficult because of all my symptoms. I’m also a low income student so I don’t know if I’m able to live off campus since my tuition is payed by scholarships, and if me living off campus is going to mess up my tuition cost. Maybe I’m not doing the processes right or something but I’m a little tired of housing being an issue for me. I’m not so sure what to do anymore. If anyone knows what I can do pls let me know 🥀🐺 i applied for housing accommodations solely due on the basis of mental illness diagnoses and i got approved for single & ESA both years I’ve applied. it’s like 5k a semester for me too thus making it easier to have a private space that’s ALSO very close to campus for the days my symptoms are really bad. but yes, keep telling us how unrealistic it is. On a second note, full scholarships do not cover the price of single rooms. You’ll be paying for the difference if you haven't already talked with your moses representative, i highly recommend you do so because maybe the information they have is just not sufficient enough for them to believe you need a single and you'll just need to argue your case further. additionally, i'm wondering if you indicated interest in BOTH a single-in-suite and single studio? bc either one of those alone is gonna be much harder to get than other housing accommodations like an ESA for example. i personally didn't get single studio accommodation but i did get single-in-suite offered at broome. i did also have approval for an ESA (cat) tho so when i switched to a single-in-suite at palladium thru bed-for-bed, everyone was allergic so housing basically told me "you can't bring your cat, so we're offering you a single studio at second street, take it or leave it" so there's still wiggle room for a single studio in that case if that's what ur looking for
A: ahh I see I have to check my bursar to see if that was applicable to me
A: I didn't ask, I just looked at my housing bill after the accommodation was approved and it had a single for the cost of a double. Not sure if this is true across the board though, as this thread has shown they're not always super consistent.
A: question, i’m not sure if i got an extra charge waived for my single but i get a lot of aid instead so my cost was low, but i’m wondering if you had to explicitly ask for an extra charge to be waived?
A: uh… no? mental health issues are normally distributed. so yes everyone gets sad sometimes everyone gets stressed but the whole point of being diagnosed with a DISORDER is that it impairs your functioning in daily life. your understanding of mental illness is fundamentally flawed, making your comment far from realistic. it’s just inconsiderate.
A: as someone that got an extra charge waived single room accommodation when I lived on-campus due to a mental disorder diagnosis, I can confirm that you can/should get housing accommodations for this reason. unfortunately NYU can be very ableist and selective about this. this is something that OP should bring up with the moses center in case they're missing documentation. the whole system works on assuming people who get accommodations rejected won't fight their cases- NYU doesn't really want a lawsuit on their hands for discrimination either.
A: It’s a realistic take. It takes more than a mental disorder diagnosis to get housing accommodations.
A: It’s nyu, everyone has mental issues. Your justification might just not be enough for accommodations.
A: as long as you're explaining in detail why you need the single and providing documentation from a provider who is ALSO being detailed, you're definitely doing the process right.

Q: Can I switch to off campus housing before fall semester? — Hey everyone! I’m a student looking to attend NYU in the fall (ED2) and I was curious, would I be able to switch to off campus housing prior to classes starting? I selected on-campus as a mean to gauge the amount of money I’d pay with that as an option but I do want to make sure that I can back out of it before putting a deposit in if it’s unaffordable. NYU isn’t clear about this. I don’t live too far from the school but the prospect of living in Manhattan seems enticing (particularly for my career)
A: Yeah ofc, and yes ur exactly  right financial aid does not change at all! When you received your financial aid, the bill will include housing + other stuff as 25k if I remember correctly. If you choose the cheapest form and meal plan I also don’t think it will add to that but it’s just an estimate they put. You just have to subtract that 25k from your bill including your aid to see the leftover amount. Mine was greater than what I actually ended up paying for this semester.
A: Gotcha, thank you! If you don’t mind me asking, does the financial aid package change if you don’t pay? As in, basically you would just subtract the amount you’d pay for housing from the total and that would be everything you would be required to pay. Sorry if it’s a confusing question
A: Yes- I also applied for housing to see how much I would pay but ultimately I did not go through with it after receiving my acceptance. When you get in you have to pay a deposit fee of $1000 for housing, so unless you do not do that you are not bound at all.

Q: NYU Gallatin scholarship refund if living off campus? — Hey, incoming NYU Gallatin student here. I received a large Gallatin Scholarship along with Pell and NY State TAP. If I live off campus (no NYU housing or meal plan), my total aid would exceed my billed tuition. I know NYU refunds excess aid as a credit balance, but I’m trying to confirm whether the Gallatin Scholarship specifically is capped at tuition or if it can create a refundable credit balance like Pell/TAP. My award page does *not* say “tuition only” or “may not exceed tuition,” so I’m unsure. Has anyone with a Gallatin Scholarship (or similar NYU school scholarship) actually received a refund beyond tuition? If so: * Did it refund automatically to your bank? * Was it adjusted when you chose off-campus housing? Would really appreciate firsthand experiences. Thanks. The convenience of a meal plan and the proximity of the dorms are both great though.
A: would you mind if i DMed you to ask about your stats and stuff?
A: I recommend getting close with at least one or more professor that can be your mentor. I am still close with my freshman year physics professor from 2012 and she has written me countless recommendations and even invited me to her 70th bday. Having a mentor is extremely valuable!!
A: Thank you so much! can't wait to begin! any recommendations/tips?
A: I just wanted to say congratulations!! From a Gallatin Alum. What an accomplishment!!
A: Won’t decide for sure until I get offered my dorm room and cost. I’d rather live off campus than live in a triple at a bad dorm.
A: ah i see, are you going to live off campus?

Q: Off-campus vs. with parents (commuting) vs. dorming financial aid? — I'm applying ED2 and I already live in NYC. I realized I accidentally put "off-campus" instead of "with-parents" for the CSS profile. Do people who select "off-campus" generally get more aid than people who put "with-parents?" Would there be any way for them to actually check if I'm living with my parents as opposed to renting? I'm willing to correct this mistake, but I haven't figured out how to yet so I'm curious how it affects financial aid in the case that I can't fix it Also, how much does the aid get affected if I'm a commuter as opposed to dorming? I would assume that the financial aid would go down if I didn't have to pay the food & housing bill, but by how much? Is it really cheaper to commute as opposed to dorming? I'm struggling so bad to find information about this online, and the financial aid office email isn't responding because it's winter break. Please help.
A: I am not sure how much Fafsa awards at most, but it will definitely not cover tuition. Not even close. You must submit everything timely to idoc for css :). That is your best chance for highest possible scholarship.
A: brooo i still havent submit my idoc for css...am i cooked?? do. think if my parents make less then 27k a year fafsa would help me? or would it be the same case as u🥲
A: Fafsa gave me almost no assistance, just over $800 for the year. The scholarship came from filling out CSS profile. For NYU-sponsored scholarship CSS profile is definitely more important.
A: what scholarships did u apply to? or is that from doing fafsa alone? or did u also do css
A: I am a commuter. Living with parents. Got 92k scholarship. I don’t think it matters for financial aid if you are a commuter, as in you would not get less or more because you commute and live with parents. I think it’s your application and financial info that would matter.

Q: How much time did you find yourself spending at your dorm/apartment? — I just got admitted with a $95k scholarship (I’m technically very low income but I get enough support from relatives to survive). Estimated COA shows $68,576 tuition, $19,528 housing, and $6,910 in food with \~6,000 personal expenses, supplies, transportation, etc. If I choose to live off campus, I get \~26,500 as a refund from my scholarship that I can use for rent, food, and anything I choose. So, I’m left with some choices: 1. Live in low cost dorms (\~11,000 per year for a triple) with a meal plan 2. Live in a more expensive dorm (\~16,000-22,000 per year for a double/single) with a meal plan 3. Live off campus in a cheap apartment ($2500-3000 split with roommates) 4. Live off campus in a more expensive apartment ($5000-6000 split with roommates) I plan on having a job (I’m a workaholic and can’t be at peace without working) and working anywhere from 15-30 hours a week (as much as possible as a uni student). So now for the question: Do you find yourself spending a lot of time in your dorm, or is it more of a place to sleep and relax when you have nothing to do? If I’m not spending a lot of time there, I’d probably settle for a low cost dorm and save the money my scholarship gives me. Otherwise, I’d find a nicer apartment to live in or opt for more expensive dorms. I’m from Louisiana where $2000 in rent and $7000 in food is enough for a family of 10, so I’m still adjusting. I’ve always wanted to live in a nice apartment somewhere like NYC, so I’m definitely considering spending up to $3000-3500 (scholarship gives me enough for around $2200 per month) in rent with one or two or seven roommates with a decent job and some support from my family, but only if I’m actually going to be spending a good chunk of my day there. Sorry for the essay **tldr:** Do you spend enough time at home to justify expensive housing? I moved down to the gulf coast and it’s a huge difference between NYC and here. Dorm for the first year you won’t regret it. Personally, I prefer having dining hall access and not having to cook. More time to explore and socialize that way. It would be harder to build a sense of community off campus. Plenty of time for cooking and commuting after graduation. I’ll definitely look into Rubin hall and other dorm options, I’m just unwilling to take the risk of having a bad form as I’d assumed you’d be stuck with it unless you had a legitimate reason to leave besides not liking it. As for socializing, I’m not concerned about long commutes and really having to go out of my way to socialize. But at the end of the day, I’m a workaholic who likes to keep to themselves except for the occasional going-out. If it’s possible, I’d absolutely be interested in first seeing what dorm/room I’d be in and maybe spending a few weeks or a month just to really see what it’s like. If getting into Paulson wasn’t literally a lottery, things would be different. Come sophomore and junior year thats where the situation changes since you’ll know how you live by then and are adjusted to the whole thing. Also if you don’t like the dorm you select you don’t have to pay a deposit yet and you can backout. Also what ive noticed is that its way harder socially for my friends who live off campus. I met this girl who lived in a really nice apartment but regretted it since she was 30 mins away from campus and found it alot harder to socialize I do plan on having one or two roommates, I actually wouldn’t like to live alone. If needed, my parents can co-sign, but I plan on either having a joint lease or just being considered an occupant and not an actual tenant. I don’t mind long commutes (I’ve gotten used to an hour long commute to school) so outer boroughs aren’t much of an issue to me. As for dorms, this is my first time living in an urban city and I would not want to spend that time living in a cramped dorm and I definitely don’t want to risk having a bad dorm (heard too many stories). This is the first opportunity I’ve ever had to really have a nice place to call home and it’s very difficult for me to pass that up.
A: The dorms are great. I recommend your first year to dorm as you adjust to a new city and new environment. Renting in NYC is not forgiving and rent won’t be your only expense. It’ll be a mental drain maintaining your apartment as you adjust and being a commuter makes it harder to make friends. Dorm your first year with a meal plan then live off campus for all the rest. (I’m graduated now but this is my advice).
A: Not much at all. NYC has so much to offer. You just need a mattress where you can sleep.
A: look for apartments in LES. you can find a really nice spot for 1.7-2k, way nicer than youd get by campus. and youre saving money cuz nyc eats up ur pockets more than you could ever imagine lol just by existing. LES is also a 20 min walk from campus too.
A: Hey i got like the exact same financial package as you. NYU is giving me everything but indirect costs. I couldn’t book a 1 on 1 cuz it was filled. Could i message you?
A: I pay 1100/mo with utility for my own room in a decent spot with roommates and its like a 25 min train ride from my main building, 4 min walk to and from each station. Its pretty tough we even have a backyard and the commute is not bad. Safe area too. Spending 2000/mo on a nicer and/or closer spot would be quite nice. If i were you id get a room maybe somewhere close in Brooklyn, you do lowkey spend a decent amount of time in your place.
A: The dorms are really not that bad. Very high chance you can get into Rubin and its a really nice dorm. During my freshman year I was basically never in my dorm and just used it to sleep, and I really liked the ability of dumping my stuff off then hanging out with friends.

Q: Need Housing Fall Semester ASAP — Hi! I don’t go on here often but I was wondering if anyone can help me with my predicament. I submitted a housing waitlist form back in March and got off the waitlist but was unable to pay the $1000 deposit at the time, making me unable to live on-campus. In the meantime, I have tried fixing my housing situation and have been looking for housing for the past month, including resubmitting the NYU housing form. I only need housing for the Fall semester, so I’m wondering if anyone has a spare room to sublet or knows some resources where I can find housing (or if it’s possible for me to ask NYU Housing for anything). Lots of housing discussions there *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.*
A: Send me a DM if you want links to WhatsApp groups
A: listingsprojects (new listings come out every wednesday)!
A: you could’ve had the housing deposit waived. i got it waived twice now.
A: There’s an NYU Subletting page on instagram you might want to check out too!!
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/Right_Stay4331 is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.
A: definitely check facebook!! there’s always a ton of sublets and stuff on there. also i heard there’s vetted NYU housing groups on whatsapp, but i think you have to get like invited. not sure of anyone who’s in them but i read it in another sub.

Q: Incoming students whatsapp groups — Are there any whatsapp groups for incoming students searching for off campus housing? Or any other places where you can find off campus housing for incoming students? *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.* https://chat.whatsapp.com/I12eS367fL561KeTmQNNrw *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.*
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/Lost_Share_7497 is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/asugradstu is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.
A: https://chat.whatsapp.com/FGq0Rh7INKPGRyivvp1sma
A: Heyz can you share the link again, it's expired.

Q: apartment help — does anyone and i mean anyone have any suggestions for apartments literally anywhere that i can live in
A: I have a place you can rent in queens - you’ll feel safe and save tons of money. Btw I’m nyu alumni.

Q: Summer Sublease Needed near NYU area — I'm looking for a summer sublet in Manhattan, ideally in Midtown, Kips Bay, SoHo, or the East Village, from **mid-June through August 31**. A little about me: * 21-year-old female * Will be interning in NYC this summer * Mostly in the office on weekdays * Clean, quiet, responsible, and respectful of shared spaces * Prefer living with other women My budget is **$1,500–$2,100/month**, though I'm open to negotiating for the right place. I'm specifically looking for a furnished apartment/room, so if you're leaving the city for the summer, studying abroad, traveling, or know someone looking to sublet their space, I'd love to hear from you. If you have a sublet available or any leads, please feel free to DM me. Thanks so much! 😊 *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.* *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.*
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/clean_apartment1 is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/clean_apartment1 is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.

Q: Room Sublease – June To August | Sunset Park, Brooklyn — I'm an Indian student at NYU and am looking for someone to take over my room from June 1st to August 31st. The place: 43rd St, 8th Ave, Brooklyn: 4B2B apartment You'd have your own bedroom and a shared (with 1 other flatmate) bathroom. Room comes furnished with a bed, mattress, desk, chair, and a clothes rack. Rent: $815/month, paid directly to the landlord (no markup/increase from my end) Location: a) 5-min walk to the D train (9th Ave & Fort Hamilton Pkwy) b) 1-min walk to a large grocery store + several nearby smaller delis and pharmacy c) 1-min walk to the laundromat d) 25 mins to NYU by train e) 5 min walk to the scenic Sunset Park offering stunning views of the Manhattan skyline and the harbour. Your flatmates will be NYU students. Chill setup, great neighborhood. DM me if you're interested or have any questions!

Q: Where do NYU students post their apartments for the summer? — Not sure if this is the right place - **basically just seeing if anyone has a summer sublet available/knows where to look.** Just graduated and moving to NYC to start work! Unfortunately I am not from the area and it seems like most places require sec deposit + first months rent, plus can't really afford a hotel + flight rn. Was thinking to sublet a studio/1bd for the summer and just apartment hunt in person. Budget is $2.5k!
A: when i hit this last year the NYU housing facebook groups were the move - people post summer sublets constantly. also try the off campus housing portal or streeteasy with short term filters. for 2.5k you could probably find a studio in LES or astoria. just make sure you see the place first or facetime someone.

Q: LES CHINATOWN/LITTLE ITALY NEAR F TRAIN DELANCEY STREET STATION — LES CHINATOWN/LITTLE ITALY NEAR F TRAIN DELANCEY STREET STATION I’m working and doing my Master’s at Hunter. I wanna know if there’s anyone that needs a place ASAP for the summer starting from June 1st to the end of August. I have a very clean room available in a third floor apartment walk up. Newly renovated 3 bedroom 1 shared bathroom unfurnished. The other roommate works in a bank. Amazing, safe neighborhood. Papa John’s, Subway, Dunkin’ Donuts literally downstairs. Safe neighborhood with tons of bars and restaurants bordering Chinatown and Little Italy. $2500 for rent ($84 bucks a day!),  including 1 month deposit. All utilities included! Looking for clean, respectful roommates. International students welcomed. If you show your NYU ID you get a 5% discount on the rent. Must sign lease and pay rent before May 28th. Contact anytime before May 29th! Thanks! Good luck with finals.
A: I suggest you swing buy to look at this room in person if you really want it. The other rooms are taken.

Q: LES CHINATOWN/LITTLE ITALY NEAR F TRAIN DELANCEY STREET STATION — Hey! I’m working and doing my Master’s. I wanna know if there’s anyone that needs a place ASAP for the summer starting from June 1st to the end of August. I have a very clean room available in a third floor apartment walk up. Newly renovated 3 bedroom 1 shared bathroom unfurnished. The other roommate works in a bank. Amazing, safe neighborhood. Papa John’s, Subway, Dunkin’ Donuts literally downstairs. Safe neighborhood with tons of bars and restaurants bordering Chinatown and Little Italy. $2500 for rent ($84 bucks a day!),  including 1 month deposit. All utilities included! Looking for clean, respectful roommates. If you show your NYU ID you get a 5% discount on the rent. Must sign lease and pay rent before May 28th. Contact anytime before May 29th! Thanks! Good luck with finals. If there’s someone who has money they get a studio for around 4k ish. Even my friends who are working choose to save on rent and live in brooklyn for 800-1,2k rent.
A: One room is already rented. This is the last room available.
A: Goodluck dude if someone has 2,5k for a room in downtown. Us poor people get a place somewhere in brooklyn / upper manhattan.

Q: Need job asap — Hi guys. I got into nyu for grad school and was planning on moving June to get familiar with New York since I’m from Texas. I’ve been desperately trying to find a job since it’s impossible to get an apartment without proof of income. I come from a beauty retail back ground and customer service. Does anyone know any tips or could help refer me where they work? I’m desperate at this point and looking for any assistance or advice. I’ve applied to countless jobs both in New York and remote. Thanks!
A: Apply for a university job at the admissions office, library, etc.
A: Check Craigslist for salons hiring. Coffee shops too if you’re open to it. Just remember you need proof of 40x rent to apply and qualify for an apt in NYC. Good luck 🍀

Q: Subletting apartment for summer — *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.*
A: This submission has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/Particular-Area5670 is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.

Q: Room in Manhattan (grad student) — Hey! I recently got admitted into NYU grad school and am looking for an apartment to share. I’m looking for a lease of 12 month starting in August 2026. If Anyone’s looking for a roommate please let me know!!! Thank you (I’m 22M) *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.*
A: Try posting it on the NYU housing group!! Its so much easier to find roommates there
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/jointhetrap is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.

Q: Endless Searching How is apartment hunting in NYC still this inefficient? Hours on StreetEasy, Zillow, Facebook groups… just to find listings already gone.

Q: is anyone else losing their mind over nyc rent rn? — i know this is not new information and we all knew what we signed up for coming to nyu but i just did the math on what i'm spending on my shared 2bed in east village and i think i blacked out for a second. like we are paying more in rent than some people's mortgages in other states and we don't even have a dishwasher anyway i've been going down a rabbit hole trying to figure out if rent is actually going to get any better and i found this site called luxury price drops (luxurypricedrops.com) that tracks every price cut on luxury apartments in nyc in real time. again i know luxury apartments sound irrelevant to us but it actually matters and here's why when those $15K/month hudson yards and fidi apartments can't find tenants or can't sell, it creates a trickle down effect. that $15K unit drops to $11K, so the $8K unit in the same building has to come down, which puts pressure on the $5K unit, which eventually puts pressure on the $3K shoebox we're all fighting over right now there are a LOT of price reductions in lower manhattan and midtown. like way more than usual. hudson yards especially has units that have been cut multiple times which tells you those buildings are struggling to fill up how this actually helps us broke nyu students: if you're looking in fidi or near the seaport, landlords in some of those newer buildings are way more flexible than they were a year ago. i know a couple people who got a month free or got the broker fee waived just by asking because the building has empty units they need to fill if your lease is coming up for renewal don't just sign it. check what's actually available in your area first. i literally pulled up listings in my building on streeteasy, saw two units listed below what i'm currently paying, screenshot it, sent it to my landlord and got my increase dropped. took 10 minutes also if you're willing to live in fidi instead of the village or east side the deals are genuinely better right now. i know the commute to campus is slightly more annoying but the L train exists and your wallet will thank you the site is free and updated daily so i've just been checking it every few days to see which neighborhoods are softening. kind of obsessive but also kind of helpful when you're trying to figure out where to live next year without going completely broke if anyone has found actual good deals near campus drop them below because apartment hunting in this city is a part time job and we should be helping each other out
A: what's honestly astounding to me is how many people pay insane amounts of money to live in ev/wv/soho/fidi rather than living literally anywhere else in the city and commuting. I'd take my hour commute from uptown over the crazy near-campus rent any day.
A: ngl you just saved me a ton of time with that trick. i had no idea about the luxury price drop domino effect. what helped me when i was hunting was setting up streeteasy alerts for specific neighborhoods and jumping on anything with a broker fee waiver. also some landlords will do a 14 month lease instead of 12 to keep the monthly lower. appreciate you sharing the site. apartment hunting really is a part time job.
A: No service to promote. They do not sell anything.
A: You are not trying to start a discussion, you are promoting a service.

Q: Looking for an apartment near NYU this summer? Read this before you start — Most people searching for the first time in NYC make the same mistakes and end up overpaying or stuck somewhere they hate. Went through it myself before getting my real estate license so I know exactly where it goes wrong. A few things that will actually save you: Start now, not in June. By the time most students start looking seriously, the good stuff is already gone. The apartments worth having near the Village and East Village move in days not weeks. What you see online is not the full picture. A lot of smaller landlords in those neighborhoods never post publicly. They fill units quietly before anything hits StreetEasy. The best apartments are the ones you never even knew existed. The FARE Act changed the game but not how people think. Since last June landlords are legally required to cover broker fees themselves — tenants no longer pay that. Sounds great, and it is, but the catch is that no-fee apartments now get flooded with applications immediately because everyone knows they don’t have to budget extra upfront. A decent place near NYU can have five applications in 48 hours. What most people don’t realize is that sometimes the best deals are actually the ones with a fee — less competition, more negotiating room, and landlords who are often more flexible on move-in terms. Knowing which is actually worth it in your situation changes everything. No-fee doesn’t automatically mean cheaper. Some landlords quietly bumped monthly rent to offset the fee they now have to cover. Always do the math on the full year not just the monthly number. The co-signer process takes longer than you think. If your parents are co-signing, get their documents ready before you find the place. Losing an apartment because paperwork wasn’t ready is brutal and happens constantly. Been talking to landlords in that area lately and have a decent feel for what’s actually moving and at what price. Happy to share what I’m seeing if you’re searching this summer — just DM me.

Q: Looking for housing — Looking for a summer sublease! Hi! I’m a USC student and moving for a summer internship in NJ and I’m looking for a private bedroom ideally around Hoboken/Jersey City area. Dates are June 30 - August 23 but can be flexible. My budget is $1400 and looking for a space that has laundry and parking as well. Please reach out to me if you have anything or any leads. Thank you :)

Q: Summer Sublease in Williamsburg! — My boyfriend (22M) has a summer sublease in Williamsburg from June 1-late August available!!! Message me for more details!

Q: Looking for a 1 Bed/1 Bath or Studio Summer Sublease: June 1 - August 9! — Hi! I am a college student from California moving to NYC from Long Island/CA and working in finance in midtown. I would love to sublease from an NYU student, as I am a student myself. I am looking for a studio - 1 bed from June 1 - August 9. My budget is 3-4,500. I would prefer neighborhoods close to Midtown: Murray Hill, Kip's Bay, Hell's Kitchen, UES areas. However, I am open to a bit further. I am super quiet and respectful! I can be flexible on dates, as well. Happy to provide any other information. Thanks! [](https://www.reddit.com/submit/?source_id=t3_1tia11h&composer_entry=crosspost_prompt)
A: summer sublets in nyc are tough but doable. have you tried the nyu housing facebook groups? they're way more active than ohana. also check listings project and ghostlight housing. murray hill and kips bay are solid bets in that budget. just watch out for scams - never send money before seeing the place. good luck with the search.

Q: Looking to take over sublease! — If anyone is subleasing this summer (ideally new jersey/jersey city area), I’d be willing to takeover as I’m starting my internship. Please message me if you have anything. Thank you!

Q: Looking for room to sublease in/near midtown manhattan — Hi everyone! I'm (21 F) from california and will be coming to NYC for an internship this summer. I'm looking for a room to sublease from June to mid August somewhere near grand central station. I need this pretty urgently so would rly appreciate a few connections! I'm really clean and respectful.
A: that's tight timing for midtown. check the nyu housing facebook groups and the off campus housing portal. also look at jersey city near path train - cheaper and quick to grand central via transfer. avoid craigslist scams that want money before showing the place.

Q: Summer Sublease — Super last minute, but looking for a summer sublease from May 15-August 12 (very flexible on those dates). I'm looking for something within a 20 minute walk of a train station in any part of the city (not interested in Hoboken or jersey city). Ideally a 1 bed or studio, but I am obviously open to roommates . Flexible budget. PM me if you have something. Thanks!
A: Don’t know if you’ve found anything yet, but I’m looking for a sub letter for my 1bed 1bath, so dm me if you’re interested!
A: I have one bedroom in a 4 bedroom apartment from 15th May to 30 th Jun. contact me if interested

Q: Looking for summer sublease — Hi! I am a student and will be interning in New Jersey and am looking for a summer sublease from late May - late August. Looking for a private bed and bathroom. My budget is around $1300. Let me know if you are subletting or have any leads. Thanks in advance! Staying here for the first three months would give you ample time to explore the different neighborhoods and find a long-term 1B/1B without any pressure. **Details:** • **Rent:** $700/month + utilities. • **Commute:** About a 15-minute drive to Rutgers and only 10 minutes walk from the PATH station (great if you want to head into the city). Let me know if you’re interested, and I can share more details or photos!
A: Hi! I saw your post about relocating to newark If you’re looking for a smooth transition, I have a sublease available from **May 15th to August 15th** that might be perfect for you.
A: Hey I am subletting my private room at Kearny, please dm me if you’re interested

Q: Looking for summer sublease! — Hi, I am originally from the west coast, studying at UC San Diego and this summer I will be interning at NYC. I am looking for a sublease takeover for the summer around 6/1/26 to 8/31/26. Let me know if you have any availability and looking for someone to take over your lease for the summer! *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.*
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/Ok_Face_1653 is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.
A: I have a 1 bedroom apartment in the Lower East Side that I am subletting for the summer
A: I have a studio in dumbo if you’re interested. Currently paying 4,000 but open to sublease for 2,800
A: Go check out nyc / nyu sublet instagram pages

Q: Sublease in summer — Going back to home from june-August and the apartment is empty, looking for someone to sublease — if u want to stay in NYC in this time period, contact me! Price is about 2000USD a month, downtown Brooklyn, 5 minute walk to tandon. Happy to communicate further if interested!

Q: May-aug sublease — Hi! I’m subleasing my apartment on Thompson near nyu from may 1-aug 1 if anyone’s interested pls lmk! I’ll send u more info *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.*
A: could you let me know how much for may to august 1? Thanks!
A: Would have to be out Aug 1 since that’s when my lease is up
A: Hello! Is it possible to do subleasing from \~ May 10th to \~ August. 10th?
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/Capable_Librarian221 is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.
A: Can I also dm? im also looking from may to august

Q: Looking for Summer Sublease (Early June–Mid August 26) — Hi — my daughter will be in NYC for a summer internship from early June through mid-August, and we’re looking for a short-term sublease for that period. Open to different neighborhoods with reasonable commute options. Female roommate preferred. Please DM me if you have something available or any leads. Thanks! *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.*
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/happy_orchard is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.
A: I think you want r/nycapartments and r/nycroomates

Q: I’m in need of an immediate sublease! — My study abroad was cancelled a day before i was supposed to leave and now im flying back to the city and still haven’t found a place to stay. I’m looking for a sublease for the semester anywhere in Manhattan. My budget is 1800-2300. pls help lol thanks
A: Hello, I have a fully furnished room available but it in Brooklyn. Check my profile and reach out if interested. It is a 4bed apartment with another lady living there.

Q: Summer Sublease Available! — Hello! I’m subleasing my apartment from May 1st to Sept 1st. It’s a 2-minute walk to NYU, it’s on Thompson street, located right in Greenwich Village! If you’re interested, please DM me and I can share the price, exact location, and more details.

Q: Spring 26 housing - subleasing? — Hey all, just wondering where you guys would go to sublease your place, specifically for the Spring 26 semester? Or just in general where students coming back from study abroad go to find housing for one semester? I’m sure there are tons of people coming back who need housing and I’m trying to find someone to sublet my studio in the east village but I’m scared that I might be too late in the semester to get anyone. On that note if anyone reading this wants to sublet my place please message me lol. It’s a really nice building + right next to freshman dorms so u could walk to school. Thanks for any suggestions!
A: Not sure if you’re still looking - but if so DM !
A: Still looking for someone to  spring sublet?
A: I'm an incoming transfer student this Spring 2026, where is your place, can I PM you, whats ur instagram?
A: looking for this too!! also wondering what are safe places to leave near nyu for females

Q: Sublease | NYU Tandon | Downtown Brooklyn | Female Only | 10/31–11/15 (Flexible End Dates) — Due to personal schedule changes, I’m looking for someone to take over my room from October 31 to November 15 (end date flexible). 📍 Location: Downtown Brooklyn, luxury high-rise with elevator and 24-hour security. •	5-minute walk to subway lines A/C/F and B/Q/R, one stop to Manhattan. •	Directly across from NYU Tandon School of Engineering (great for NYU students). •	Walking distance to DUMBO and Brooklyn Bridge—beautiful scenery and perfect for photos or evening walks. 🏠 Apartment Details: •	1B1B apartment, subletting the living room area (female only). •	Great sunlight, 15th floor, beautiful sunset view of the World Trade Center. •	In-unit washer and dryer (no need to go downstairs for laundry). •	Individual room temperature control. •	Quiet, tidy female roommate with regular schedule. •	Secure building with elevator and door access system. 🛍️ Neighborhood: •	5-minute walk to shopping center with Trader Joe’s and Target. •	Surrounded by restaurants, cafes, and a CitiBike station—very convenient for commuting or weekend outings. 👩‍🎓 Note: A lot of NYU students live in the building(AFG), so NYU students interested in long-term sublease are also welcome! I’ve graduated from NYU Steinhardt and no longer need the student apartment, so long-term NYU tenants are preferred if possible. If you rent the whole period 10%off
A: https://preview.redd.it/xnxse3jcwxwf1.jpeg?width=1280&format=pjpg&auto=webp&s=5fa602857b3a857a6f16605b3a830c9cf0325f1b
A: https://preview.redd.it/ujwz8sk8wxwf1.jpeg?width=1080&format=pjpg&auto=webp&s=0ea1e4e63de903efc27e731882922273ecbdbde5

Q: Looking for apt room to rent for a week — Hi! Me (20m) and my friend (20f) are looking for a place to stay for about a week in NYC because we want to visit the city and tour NYU. We haven’t bought flight tickets yet so dates are flexible but aiming for late august/early September. We will pay for the week. Please dm me if you or someone you know has a place available, thank you!!
A: What areas are you open to? I’ll be out of town so I’d love to sublet out my studio in Bushwick

Q: To aspiring students: classes of 24,25 and 26 are struggling post-grad — I graduated in one of those three classes and have friends in all three. Most of everyone is still jobless till this day, I know stern alumni from class of 24 who graduated with 3.5+ GPAs and still are jobless 2 years later. I know a guy who did two internships at Goldman Sachs’s he’s been jobless for 1 year. I know several people who did 2 years as entry level analysts across tech, finance, and consulting who couldn’t make it to associate level and were fired. Many can’t find work or are forced to take extremely hard jobs working 70 hours a week. A top student from class of 23 is an Amazon warehouse supervisor. He’s plastered all over sterns marketing materials. You think stern has it bad? Most of the other schools got cooked harder. Most of my foreign friends got deported back home due to not finding work in time for their visa, my wealthy friends got called back to their home states cuz even their parents didn’t wanna shell out rent money with no income. NYU and other T30 schools are no longer a gaurentor of generational wealth, and even if you’re from a rich family will your parents let you stay in nyc when you can’t find a job? Handful of students I know are making 100k+ with a 300k outlook and are working less than 50 hours a week. I’m one of them but we all ended up in sales or AI adjacent roles which do not require a T30 degree. If you’re pondering taking on life altering debt because you believe NYU guarantees an ROI, THINK AGAIN (fun facti have adhd too!) I do wonder if there are any services or adjacent services that NYU currently offers. If not.. it sounds like something worth researching if you pursue this idea. I like it. For context, I was a first-generation immigrant student who struggled a lot in my first 2 years of undergrad. I failed a course, had average grades, lacked direction, and felt overwhelmed trying to figure everything out on my own. Things changed once I learned how to study smarter, manage my time intentionally, build confidence/soft skills, find mentors, apply for scholarships, and create more balance in my life. I eventually improved my grades after mediocre do the first 2 years, completed my Master’s, studied/lived abroad (Oxford, India, Portugal, Italy — mostly through scholarships & part time school work and student loans), worked across Fortune 500s and FAANG, and after a recent mass layoff, quickly landed in a senior role at a top bank and bought my first home at 26. It made me realize a lot of students aren’t lacking capability, they’re lacking guidance, structure, mentorship, and practical systems to make the most out of university. I’m considering creating either: * a course/community on making the most of university intentionally or * a 6-week group program combining practical workshops + therapist-led support for stress, burnout, career anxiety, confidence, and navigating adulthood (potentially covered through student health benefits). If you were struggling in university, would you join something like this? Why or why not? What would make it feel genuinely valuable and trustworthy to you? Too many students We’re expected to figure it out ourselves Then they want to send surveys for post grad to figure out what we’re doing, as if they played any part in that success
A: not related but this helped me understand things a lot thanks
A: My friend and I were just discussing this morning about time management help and mentor services that were offered when she attended the University of Michigan.
A: This is amazing! Literally thinking on building a course around this for students and wonder if they would take this advice and then focus on what stops them from following the advice
A: I’ve been thinking about building something for university students around navigating academics, career stress, confidence, and life planning and I’m curious if people would actually use something like this.

Q: To aspiring students, class of 24,25 and 26 are absolutely broke. — I graduated in one of those three classes and have friends in all three. Most of everyone is still jobless till this day, I know stern alumni from class of 24 who graduated with 3.5+ GPAs and still are jobless 2 years later. I know a guy who did two internships at Goldman Sachs’s he’s been jobless for 1 year. I know several people who did 2 years as entry level analysts across tech, finance, and consulting who couldn’t make it to associate level and were fired. Many can’t find work. A top student from class of 23 is an Amazon warehouse supervisor. He’s plastered all over sterns marketing materials. You think stern has it bad? Most of the other schools got cooked harder. Most of my foreign friends got deported back home due to not finding work in time for their visa, my wealthy friends got called back to their home states cuz even their parents didn’t wanna shell out rent money with no income. NYU and other T30 schools are no longer a gaurentor of generational wealth. Handful of students I know are making 100k+ with a 300k outlook and are working less than 50 hours a week. I’m one of them but we all ended up in sales or AI adjacent roles which do not require a T30 degree. If you’re pondering taking on life altering debt because you believe NYU guarantees an ROI, THINK AGAIN
A: while i agree with you about not taking life-altering debt to go to NYU, I know many people on the opposite side of this coin in these classes- people who've landed full-time offers at elite firms and companies, people who've started unicorns, gotten into top accelerators, etc- things that likely wouldn't have been possible from their local state school. So if your family is at all comfortable and you are somewhere around the top, it's worth the risk. The job market has been fried the past few years, yes, but there is a genre of people for whom NYU is still very much worth it, and yes, this is a minority of the total student population.

Q: 🍎 Free Food & Groceries at NYU — A Quick Student Survival Guide! (Updated List) 04/10/2026 💜 — 🍎 **Free Food & Groceries at NYU — A Quick Student Survival Guide! (Updated List) 04/10/2026** 💜 Hey NYU fam, If your bank account is crying, your rent is due, and you’re still somehow paying $7 for oat milk lattes… this post is for you. I put together a **no-BS list of legit ways to get FREE food, groceries, and snacks around NYU**. Some are weekly, some are random drops, but all are real and student-friendly. Here’s what you *need* to know: 🛒 Groceries & Pantry Support: * **College Student Pantry (1st & 3rd Wednesdays)** – 602 E 9th St Just bring your student ID and a tote. It’s low-key and super helpful. * **Food Bank NYC** – Link to local food support Covers food pantries all over the city. * **Getting the $500 OTC Card** : Link to OTC card Application (Lowkey one of the most underrated hacks) Only if you live in NYC people from NJ not applicable ☕ Snacks & Hot Drinks: * **Lipton Commuter Den** – Free coffee & snacks (great if you’re rushing between classes) * **Global Spiritual Life Lounge** – All the tea you could dream of 🍵 * **CDS Lounge (if you’re in NYU CDS)** – Tea, coffee, hot chocolate, cozy vibes * **Marketplace @ Kimmel** – Free cookies, often during events or club fairs 👀 Pro Tips: * **Keep an eye on NYU Engage** – So many free food events get posted there last minute * **Tandon MakerSpace Freedge** – Random but awesome. Leftovers from catered events go here. First-come, first-served! * **Share Meals App** - lets students alert each other of food on campus, e.g., after a large event. it also allows students to share extra meal swipes with each other. 👀 Where to find free food * **Free Brunch** - Every Sunday at NYU Palladium * **NYU Engage -** Most free food events get posted last minute (club meetings = free pizza) * **Group chats / WhatsApp / Discords** - Someone *always* knows when food is being given out * **LGBTQ Center**: Free Tea and Coffee 💬 *Whether you’re on a tight budget or just love free stuff (don’t we all?), these are super helpful. NYU has more food access than people realize — it’s just not always advertised.* If you know of any other secret spots, feel free to drop them below! 👇 Sharing is caring — especially when it’s cookies. https://preview.redd.it/0g4ua2yzbxxg1.jpeg?width=720&format=pjpg&auto=webp&s=522b375badc63eae4ee5fb1cc5e50eff5a125921 https://forms.gle/trQEruj7nwxWe1ys9 *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.* *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.*
A: Hi ,how can I join this affiliate program .
A: https://preview.redd.it/ewvbt36r7vwg1.png?width=1024&format=png&auto=webp&s=324199171d2d82dee79e36f8a23a252bc5246035
A: I'm using mine and was able to waive NYU’s insurance and get my refund. It's been almost a year, and everything's been good. Got 5000+ on refund
A: From Maryland to NYU? How does it feel? welcome to nyc
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/Simple_Toe_9510 is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/Master_Mind_007 is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.

Q: subleasing 1b1b in queens — hi yall, I am currently subleasing a 1b1b in queens from May or June 2026. rent is 2500. dm me for more information :-))

Q: Commuting Vs. Dorming: What’s it like? — I’m currently deciding whether to go to my state school Rutgers in the fall or accept NYU’s offer to start in the spring. Aside from major factors like financial aid I need help with comparing options to commute or dorm. If I go to Rutgers I get to live at home since the NB campus is half an hour’s commute from my town, but if I go to NYU I either commute by train ( estimated an hour one way and includes transfers), commute by car (avoiding rush hours, making it an hour-long commute as well), or dorm. The reason I’m so nervous about dorming is I heard the housing options for spring admits aren’t all that great and honestly I’m just bothered at the thought of sharing a room. I know it’s part of the experience but I can’t even fall asleep if my family is in the room and I always turn down staying at others’ houses in favor of going home. The other incentive is just convenience (ex. Room and bathroom I only ever use, kitchen with groceries from my parents, washer and dryer in the basement, grocery store is literally a 20 min walk away, etc). Additionally, I’m not in a financial position where I could pay for rent in the city (my parents wouldn’t pay for it either). It’s partly why I’m glad I’m a spring admit for NYU since it gives me a few more months to save but my time right now is limited since I have to commit to either school by the end of April. I’m still flexible and want to hear about the opinions of current NYU students before I make any choices. In your opinion, what would you pick? Thanks in advance!
A: spring admit housing is usually in lower quality dorms like seventh street or alumni hall where you might get a triple. sharing a room when you cant sleep near others is genuinely hard. an hour commute each way with transfers will drain you fast too. if your parents are paying for rutgers and youd save 20k+ a year, take that. nyu will still be here for grad school or transfer later. the experience isnt worth going into debt or tanking your mental health over.
A: I've been taking the train to nyu from queens and honestly, I dont find it too bothersome. There's the occasional train delay but I find nyc car traffic/parking much more annoying. If you feel comfortable with the subway system and want the convenience of home then I'd say the commute is worth it.
A: an hour commute seems alright, especially if the alternative is 30 minutes to RNB anyway. You could also drive to the newport/hoboken/journal square path stations and commute from there.

Q: considering NYU Tandon MS EE — questions about tuition, funding, and housing in Brooklyn — Currently I got into MS EE and looking into the MS EE program at NYU Tandon. Had a few questions for anyone who's been through it: 1. How does tuition/funding actually work? Are merit scholarships automatic or do you have to apply separately? Any TA/RA opportunities for MS students? 2. Is the financial aid decent enough to make it manageable, or did most of you take out loans? for Master of Science, EE 3. For housing — I'd be coming in with basically no NYC experience. Is Brooklyn near Tandon actually affordable if you get roommates? What areas do you recommend? 4. Also, hows the apartment rent like is it difficult to manage? Any tips for getting approved as a student with no NYC rental history? Any advice is appreciated, especially from people who came from expensive out-of-state undergrads and had to figure out the money side of things. Thanks! If you’re open to student housing with roommates, there are shared room options starting around \~$950 in Brooklyn, and private rooms from about \~$1200. Most of these are in pretty convenient spots close to train stations, so it’s usually 10–20 minutes by train to Downtown Brooklyn / NYU Tandon. It can actually make the move easier as an international or out-of-state student since many of these places are furnished and used to renting to students, so approvals are generally smoother even without NYC rental history. If you end up committing to Tandon and want to see a few options around that range, feel free to DM me and will help you!
A: For housing around NYU Tandon, a lot of grad students end up sharing apartments since Brooklyn rents can get pretty high if you’re trying to live alone.

Q: Whats the rent situation like? — So I'll be coming to NYU in the fall semester as a graduate student. Can y'all give any metrics I can use for determining what the living costs + rent would be like at NYU? I've had a few people who'vs gone hear say that they got it within 1500 (rent + others). Is that realistic? I know for a fact i would have to get a room-mate and I have no issue with that, they told about bayridge and sunset park were good places. *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.* *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.* *I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/nyu) if you have any questions or concerns.* The owners speak just enough english to collect rent every month and inform us of the utility bills. If you need me to connect you to him then DM.
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/Harshithasureshac is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/Harshithasureshac is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.
A: This comment has been automatically removed because the account age of /u/Harshithasureshac is less than one day old; this is primarily in place to prevent spamming.
A: Hey! I’m also a grad student coming in the fall but I’m not from nyc so I’m looking for roommates. If you’re for an extra roommate to look for apartments with feel free to dm me
A: It was nightmare process tbh. But at the end we settled for a broker who managed to get us this place.

Q: Looking for 1 Female Roommate – StuyTown (14th St & 1st Ave) — Hi! My roommate and I go to NYU and are looking for **one more female roommate** to join our **3 bed / 1 bath** apartment in **StuyTown (14th St & 1st Ave)**. 📅 **Lease:** May 20, 2026 – May 19, 2027 💰 **Rent:** $2,400/month 📍 **Location:** StuyTown – super safe area, right by East Village, Union Square, Trader Joe’s, Target, and multiple subway lines 👭 You’d be living with two girls in our early 20s — clean, respectful, and usually busy with work/school. We’re looking for someone responsible, clean, and easy to live with. DM for more info (photos, room details, move-in process, etc.)

Q: [Student Housing] 1-Bed on UES (Direct Q Train to Union Sq) - Lease Takeover - No Fee — Hi Everyone, I’m moving out of my apartment on **92nd & 1st** and looking for someone to take over the lease starting late Feb or March 2nd. I know UES can feel far, but the **Q Train at 96th St** is a 3-minute walk from the building, and it’s a straight shot to **Union Square** (about 20 mins door-to-door). It’s actually a faster commute than when I lived in Brooklyn. **Why it’s a good setup for a Grad Student/Upperclassman:** * **Study Mode:** The apartment is on a high floor and is dead quiet. No street noise, so you can actually focus. * **Amenities:** It has an **In-Unit Washer/Dryer** (rare finding) and a 24/7 Doorman (so your packages don’t get stolen). * **Space:** It’s a real 1-bedroom with south-facing views of the city, not a dorm-style shoe box. **The Logistics:** * **Rent:** $4,700/month (Stabilized lease assignment). * **No Broker Fee.** * **Lease Term:** Ends mid-August 2026 with an option to renew. * **Unfurnished.** If you are looking for a place that is quieter/safer than the Village but still an easy commute to campus, this is it. Feel free to message me if you want the video tour If you believe this to be a mistake, please message the moderators for secondary review.
A: Your post was removed for being unrelated to NYU.

Q: Looking for female roommate to move into East Village/Stuytown apartment — looking for a female roommate to move into a bedroom ASAP from January 19th (or immediately) to April/May East Village apartment bedroom (2b1b) - you will be living with me! Rent: $2500 DM for any questions

Q: ROOMMATE/DORMS — Hello! I’m enrolling at NYU second semester 2026, I am a 24y female, I’ll be 25 next year! I’m from Argentina. Honestly, NYUs location is pretty expensive, I was wondering where most of NYU students stay at and how much it costs to pay rent in a nearby area for a whole semester. Is there a specific location where students stay at? Thank you! 🥰
A: depends what ur budget is - back when i was here I was able to pay around 1500-1700 for an apartment in LES which was pretty close by. if thats out of your budget then brooklyn/jersey city ur best bets
A: I actually can’t, you need to dm me first
A: Thank u! Where Can I find the WhatsApp groups?
A: I live in Brooklyn and people usually pay $800-1100 including utilities for a private room in a shared apartment. Gave the number for an estimate. Maybe you can find good options through WhatsApp groups. That’s how I found it.
A: Hey! I’m also an incoming graduate CS student for spring 2026 semester. I found some cheap good apartments through facebook & whatsapp groups — mostly Brooklyn & bayridge
A: Im from Brazil, I’m starting ma in psychology in the fall. The best options for us is somewhere in Brooklyn or Jersey City.
A: biggest problem might be finding a guarantor if you’re international though
A: i live in downtown brooklyn for 1.2k a month! recommend looking on facebook housing groups because that’s how i found my place!
A: I’m going as an exchange student and will take LLM courses

Q: RENT - International Students — Im a international student and I have no guarantor, any tips on where I can find places to rent that will accept my I-20 or my safes as a proof of income and are not a scam? JSQ in Jersey city is prime for international students housing.
A: I know, I only see scams, I’ve found mine before on Craigslist
A: I am looking for a place too I’m so exhausted
A: OP join a few student housing groups on WhatsApp or Facebook. Since the spring semester is around the corner you will see a few hundred housing posts some of them posted by other students for their own rooms. This is if you want to live in Manhattan or Brooklyn. If not then follow what other people are saying in this thread.
A: A third party guarantor is needed in most places. pandaguarantee gives you a pre-approval letter to use when shopping around.
A: So you gotta show loan document or moneu in bank account to show that you can pay
A: You have to get a third party guarantor. That’s how it works in nyc at least
A: Jersey City has plenty that will just accept your I-20 as proof of income. Look up Journal Square URBY, pretty friendly leasing office and prompt with their responses. Newport is also quite nice. Jersey City is pretty good if you want a newer units for around $2800-$3500 range for 1BR units. Less for studios obv.

Q: I'm an NYU student looking to sublet my room in Lower East Side (Dec 15 – Jan 15, flexible) — Hi! I’m subletting my fully furnished room in the Lower East Side for about a month while I’m away. Dates: Dec 15 – Jan 15 (flexible by a few days on either side) Location: LES, 5 min walk to Trader Joe’s, Target, and Delancey St–Essex St station (F/M/J/Z). Tons of coffee shops, bars, and nightlife nearby. About the apartment: * 4BR, 2 bath apartment on the 2nd floor * In-unit washer & dryer * 2 bathrooms (one with a shower) * Access to a public terrace with beautiful views * Pet-friendly building Your room: * Large windows with great natural light * Fully furnished: bed, study desk, chair, closet, 5-drawer dresser, full-length mirror Roommate: * You’ll actually only be sharing the apartment with one person while you’re here as the other roommates are out of town for this period * They’re a grad student in their 20s, clean, respectful, and fairly busy with school. Rent: * $2,500 total for the stay, including utilities + WiFi * Security deposit: $1000, refundable at the end of your stay if there’s no damage Ideal subletter: * Responsible, tidy, and respectful of shared spaces * Okay with normal apartment noise but not throwing big parties I have more photos ready and can also send a quick video walkthrough. * If you’re interested, please message me with Your exact dates * What you do (student, intern, job) * Any social profiles (LinkedIn/Instagram) you’re okay sharing
A: Im dental student at nyu 25M looking for a room nearby


## TOPIC: RENT PRICES

Q: Incoming transfer question about off-campus housing — How is it expected to be able to find a place off campus, with the pricing being the way it is. It can’t be easy for those from out of state being forced to move with no job or parental backing

Q: Help with offcampus housing — Hey everyone, I recently got accepted into NYU Courant for  Fall 2026, and I’m currently looking for off-campus private rooms or sublets starting August 1st. Right now, I’m staying in my undergraduate university’s summer housing, so I’m trying to secure a place before the semester starts. My budget is around $1,000/month total. If anyone knows good resources, housing groups, or someone who’s leasing/subletting their place, I’d really appreciate the help. Thanks!

Q: Transfer off-campus housing — Is anyone looking to have off-campus housing? I got accepted yesterday and have been searching for resources and roommates to get an apartment somewhere close to NYU. I am an incoming 3rd year (Male) transfer to CAS with Economics, transferring from UCLA. I am international from Europe with a comfortable budget per month. I try to keep the room tidy, sleep around 12, and am looking to have a single room. If anyone is interested I would love to chat and figure something out.
A: I'm currently in LA, transfering to CAS Econ as well. I have pretty similar living preferences so lmk if you're still looking
A: “NYU students casually saying ‘comfortable budget’ while searching for NYC housing like they’re entering the Hunger Games 😭 hope you find chill roommates tho, transferring internationally and apartment hunting at the same time sounds brutal.”
A: Heyyo, pretty much on the same boat here! Also a transfer student (from Rutgers) thinking about housing. Sleep schedule might be a little cooked but I’m pretty much looking for the same thing as you !

Q: Sophomore transfer — I got into NYU a few days ago and I was just curious on the housing. I’m not crazy about being in the dorms and I know that it’s fairly cheaper to find a place off campus with roommates but does anyone know where to look? I know Facebook is great but I’m really hoping to find great roommates after having two bad experiences at my last school, so where do people usually find each other? I should mention I’ll be at Steinhardt, so what part of town should I be looking at?
A: Nyu off campus website on the roommate finder is where I found mine!!

Q: Recently admitted — I was recently admitted into the Masters program at Steinhardt. Does anyone have any advice on housing on campus versus off campus? Would love to find something I can afford
A: I appreciate it. I have started looking and joined a few Facebook groups. I wouldn’t mind commuting as long as it was affordable.

Q: NYU Promise – How to Survive If I Can’t Afford Housing? — Hi everyone, I might be eligible for the NYU Promise, which I know can help with tuition. I’ve heard that they might give me full ride but full rides “including housing and food” are very very rare, and my financial situation is really tight, I literally can’t afford dorms or off-campus housing. If I get accepted and receive the NYU Promise, what options do I have to survive in New York? Are there any affordable housing solutions, scholarships, or resources for students in situations like mine? Any advice or experiences would be super helpful. Thanks! hope I just get the full ride 😩 Especially given how poor the job market is, I know so many people in "good" majors who can't find a job for the life of them lol
A: I have NYU promise as well and it covers my food and housing.
A: Maybe that would be one of my backup plans,
A: I don’t really have other options, I’m just gonna stick to what I’m good at, which is a field that I have a lot of experience in, anything other than that is bullshit for me
A: As long as you are not taking out any debt, ignore everyone and study what you want to study. It would be different if you didn't have a full ride.
A: It’s competitive but you can apply to be an RA your junior and senior year which is free room and board. So that would mean probably loans your first two years. I’d look into what others said though about nyu promise covering everything
A: Thank You so much, I appreciate your help 🙏🏻
A: ngl this is a real struggle. look into the housing insecurity fund through the student resource center - they help with exactly this. also check if you qualify for the commuter student meal plan which is cheaper. some students do the residence hall assistant position for free housing. the financial aid office has a specific form for housing cost appeals too. definitely talk to the promise program coordinator directly.
A: That’s pretty understandable yeah I truly understand what you’re talking about, the thing is I have a really huge portfolio in music and music business, and that would really help me get the scholarship, because I was born in this industry and I worked in it and I have a long career in music, but If I picked another major, I don’t have any experience and I don’t have any special experience, I’m gonna be like any other student with no experience and no story to hook the uni with

Q: Transfer Housing help!!! — Hello! I'm transferring into CAS for fall 2026 and I am hoping to get on-campus housing; however, I know it's very limited, and I'm not from NY, so I was wondering how best to find safe (preferably cheapish) off-campus housing?! Any other tips from transfers would be awesome 💜
A: hi! I’m transferring into CAS too. So far I’ve just been spamming people on Roomies and subletting pages on instagram lol

Q: Where do NYU Tandon Master's students live? — I applied to housing as soon as it came out. But I would love to hear the experience of other master's students who have lived on campus. Also, I am looking into off-campus housing. A guarantor would not be an issue for me. Where is a good website to start looking? I would also love to hear any building/location recommendations.
A: Streeteasy is a great resource if you're looking for a normal lease. Depending on your budget roommates might be necessary though.

Q: NYU Off Campus Housing — I was admitted to NYU for a master's program. I'm looking for off-campus housing. Does anyone know the best websites to find good-priced rooms for rent? thx

Q: Thinking of switching NYU regular round→ ED2 (CAS) + questions about NYU — Hi everyone, I’ve already applied to NYU regular round for CAS, but I’m seriously considering switching my application to ED2(if possible). I had a few questions and would really appreciate advice from current students, especially international / low-income students. Context: •	Applied to CAS •	Planning to double major in Math + Economics •	Hypothetically, if I receive the NYU Promise Fund, it would cover full tuition •	I’m considering living off-campus instead of NYU housing •	My family can contribute about half of my living costs, and I’m hoping to cover the rest through on-campus jobs + internships Questions: 1.	If tuition is fully covered, how realistic is it to manage living costs in NYC as a low-income/international student? 2.	How hard is it to balance off-campus living + CAS workload, especially with a double major in Math and Econ? 3.	Do most low-income / international students live on-campus, or do many go off-campus? 4.	Is it common for NYU international students to find roommates and live together off-campus? (Any ways to connect with other students for housing?) 5.	What’s a realistic estimate for monthly living costs (rent + food + transport) for a student living off-campus? I’m asking because a senior from my school got into NYU recently and received something close to full tuition, but not a full ride. I’m trying to understand what life looks like if tuition is covered but living costs still need to be managed. Thanks so much in advance , any insight would really help! Ig you need to google it first
A: https://preview.redd.it/kg9dus8nr6bg1.jpeg?width=1290&format=pjpg&auto=webp&s=5b48c721465c3e09c7a5eebfdef3b8ca3abbab6c
A: you don't qualify for the nyu promise if you're an international student

Q: will i actually get placed for housing — i submitted a waitlist application for spring housing and rn i got an email that there isn’t room to give me an offer and that if space becomes available it will be a temporary placement off campus. has anyone actually gone through with this and is the temporary placement to make sure i have somewhere to stay before i move in to an actual dorm? super frustrated bc im a transfer and was really excited to dorm
A: My daughter got her Spring 26 acceptance on 12/18 & it was already too late to apply for waitlist. She emailed to ask about options but did not hear back before the office closed. We’re searching the rental apps & sublets available, roommates needed FB posts for off-campus housing but have any transfers actually gotten temp housing after applications closed? TIA!
A: i'm not but i wasnt dorming this past sem, so i was considered waitlist too. i emailed them asking wassup bcs i applied mad early
A: i hope so omg. are you a spring transfer too???
A: omg also got same email! hopefully they find us placement soon!

Q: Furnished Soho 1 room in 3b1b — Looking for someone to take over my room in a 3 bed, 1 bath apartment. Details: Private bedroom in a 3B1B apartment Fully furnished (desk, AC, full-size bed included) In-unit washer and dryer 3rd-floor walk-up Location: 5–7 minute walk to Trader Joe’s 5–7 minute walk to Spring St (C/E) 5–10 minute walk to campus Rent: $2,166/month Tenant only pays Wi-Fi and electricity Available September 1. Message me for photos or video or additional details.

Q: Two more roommates needed! — **WE (ME AND ANOTHER PERSON) ARE LOOKING FOR TWO ROOMMATES FOR AN APARTMENT WE WANT TO RENT IN NYC. THE LEASE WILL START IN AUGUST. THE APARTMENT IS LOCATED IN LONG ISLAND CITY (30 MINS TRAIN RIDE TO MANHATTAN). IT IS A 4 BEDROOM/2BATHROOM APARTMENT. THE RENT WILL BE $1200 PER PERSON. THE OTHER PERSON WILL BE WORKING IN THE CITY AND I'LL BE ATTENDING NYU AS A GRAD STUDENT. DM ME FOR MORE DETAILS OR IF YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS. THANK YOU!**

Q: how to find a rent stabilized apartment near campus — i've been helping my gf find a rent stabilized apartment for a few months now. stabilized buildings barely ever turn over so vacancies are rare, which is why its taken forever somewhere along the way i sidequested and decided to make some free resources for other people doing the same thing, figured i'd share what we found and what i made fwiw "rent stabilized" = your landlord can only raise rent by a % set each year by the rent guidelines board (been like 2-3% lately). there's about a million nyc units qualify. ways to check if a specific building qualifies: - hcr.ny.gov has a public lookup, free - you can also request your own rent history from dhcr, also free, takes a few weeks. this also tells you if a previous tenant was overcharged which you can sometimes claim back stuff worth knowing if you're searching: - r/NYCrentstabilized is a small sub with a bot that autoposts when new stabilized listings hit the market - the map i made is at leaseswap.nyc/map, basically every stabilized building in nyc plotted out so you can see which blocks have the most. free, no signup rough rule if you dont wanna look anything up yet: built before 1974 with 6+ units are usually stabilized. one thing to watch out for is "preferential rent" - landlord advertises a discount off the legal max as your rent. the laws on bumping you back up at renewal got tighter in 2019 but the longterm thing that matters is the legal regulated rent not whatever theyre offering you, so always ask for both numbers if anyones has any questions feel free to dm me, i've gotten kinda decent at this at this point
A: Props to you for doing your best to promote your slop everywhere but I feel like you spent more time promoting it than asking the agent to put it together for you.

Q: Othmer Hall Question — Hello! I will be dorming at Othmer hall next semester and would like to know more about it. I do not know anyone who has dormed in this residence hall before. I mainly want to know what the apartment style dorms are like, good and cheap eats nearby, and if the shuttle is worth taking compared to the subway towards main campus. Anything helps! Thanks!
A: Thank you so much! I really appreciate your reply!
A: but the train is legit right next to where the bus stop is, so if the wait is too long, it's literally right there
A: Hi! The Othmer hall apartment style I stayed in the past fall had one main common room with a kitchen, breakfast nook, couch, and one shared bathroom. There were two rooms, and each room housed 2 people. Inside the room, we were provided with a dresser, a drawer dresser, a desk, and a bed. There is a lot of good food in the Dekalb market right next to the Trader Joe's in the basement of that little shopping area with the Target and stuff. I personally recommend the shuttle but sometimes it can run late or be canceled, just make sure to check the live updates before waiting around to see if the shuttle is going to run late or be canceled.

Q: 1 bedroom apartment/room available for June — Looking to sublet a 1-bedroom apartment/room for the month of June. Please DM me if you or someone you know is looking. Thanks!
A: Looking as well. Optimally if you have more than 1 room to fit a friend.
A: It is one bedroom in 4 bedroom apartment. Do you have any questions?
A: It is one bedroom in a four best apartment. Are you male/female? Do you have any questions

Q: Looking for an apartment roommate @ NYU as a sophomore — Please please pleaseeee reach out to me if you are looking to buy an apartment near NYU! I am currently transferring there as a sophomore and dorms are pretty much full. Would love to split rent with someone as it’ll be cheaper on both ends. About me: -I will be 19 when the school year starts -I am Indian American from michigan -My instagram is @heerxsingh (I’m a girl) -Always down to spend money, eat, party, gym, game night, explore the city and neighboring cities – will never say no to fun, I’m very outgoing. -I LOVE ramen, sushi, anything Italian , anything thai, anything Indian -love going out for dessert too, definitely have a sweet tooth -I am super clean and borderline OCD, won’t go to sleep or leave without a clean apartment -I loveee cooking -would occasionally have my bf/friends from michigan fly in to stay for a few days - will make sure that doesn’t get in the way or bother my roommate

Q: Seniors moving out — Hi are any seniors graduating planning to move out of their 2 bedroom apartment? Me and my roomate are juniors and want to move and want to avoid street easy again at all costs🙏🙏

Q: looking for a studio/one bedroom with attached bathroom for the summer — hi nyu friends! i'm a junior (f) at ucla spending the summer in the city and i'm hoping to find a place for the summer :> my dates and budget are flexible but i need my own place because my mom will be visiting for a week over the summer and i would really like to host her (so please only respond if you're okay with me having a guest over!) i am very clean and will be out of the apartment for most of the time either a studio or a bedroom in a shared apartment is okay as long as i have an attached bathroom + the other flatmates are cool with guests!
A: NYU actcually offers summer housing at their dorms. Plenty are apt style.

Q: Single room in the EV for 3k (negotiable) — Renting out a room for the summer. Hit me up. Its an awesome apartment.

Q: Single studio in Palladium or Double (2 bedrooms) in Hayden — Hi everyone! I will become a Stern grad soon and I've been given the following options for housing. Which one would you recommend and why? I have read everything on the websites but am still unsure. I still do not know my classmates but would be good to be in the same place, so if you know where grad students typically go, that would be nice to know. * Palladium is slightly more expensive (1.6k a month approx) but it's a single studio that gives you privacy, even though very very small. It's also 15m minutes walking from Stern. Allows privacy and no risk of being paired with "problematic" individuals or disrespectful. I am very chill in general, but I go crazy with people who have poor hygiene (at least when it interferes with me like mountains of plates in the kitchen, dirty underwear in common spaces). * Hayden (type F) is cheaper (1k a month), but it's a shared apartment, though bigger (610sqft) and it has two separate rooms, so I will have my own room which allows some kind of privacy. Also is super close to Stern, if I understood correctly. I will share this with someone I still do not know. If I understood correctly Hayden is only for grad students if non-law, but I don't know. Any opinion? I am ok with sharing (and won't mind to save the 600$), I am ok with guests and everything that sharing an apartment involves, just I don't like disrespectful individuals. Based on what is available as "services" in both halls, what would you recommend? Also, do you know if I can change if I regret my choice? Thanks

Q: Cheap Gyms on the Upper East Side that have Indoor Staircases? — Hi, I realize this is a very strange request, but I am wondering if anyone knows of any gyms on the upper east side (hopefully not too far from like 73rd street and 1st ave) that has an indoor staircase? I hurt my back a while ago, and the only exercise I can really do that increases my heart rate while not bothering my back/neck/etc is running up and down actual stairs (stair master doesn't work). In my prior apartment, the stairs were okay to run up and down, but the ones in my current apartment would be impossible to do so (missshapen, etc.), so I am looking for a cheap gym that I could get a (hopefully monthly) membership to and then just run up and down their indoor staircase. Any info would be super appreciated!
A: Almost all gyms have a aerobic step or a small plyo box

Q: Incoming GSAS student in StuyTown housing - looking for roommate — Hi all! I'm starting my PhD in the fall (psych, Cognition & Perception program) and planning on accepting the StuyTown housing for the first year. I'm looking to connect with other incoming grad students who have also been offered the StuyTown housing to see if we might be a good fit as roommates. I'm 27M and gay; open to roommates of all genders. I'm very clean and quiet during the week but I do hope to have an active social social life (haha) and enjoy what NYC has to offer, so I would like someone who is ok with a bit of life in the apartment on the weekends. Happy to cook together, watch movies, the usual! I've been living in Berlin for the past 3 years but I'm originally from Boston, and I've spent quite a bit of time in NYC already over the years so I'm somewhat familiar with the city. Feel free to DM me if you think we could be a good fit and we can have a Zoom call or something :)
A: Hello, I am also new PhD starting this Fall. Have you already got housing offer?? I am just curious of my current status for the application. Thanks!
A: Try reaching out through campus app like Fizz , Rooomie , Campusmesh etc

Q: Anyone subleasing their apartment from May 15th/30th to late this year (Oct/Nov/Dec)? Budget 2600 and under — Hey, my partner and I (of 7 years) are looking for an apartment to sublease right now. I make 90k and my partner is about to graduate from NYU law school. I have a credit of 780+. We are pretty chill and currently live in 200sqft apartment in union, so many places would be an upgrade. Let me know if you are subleasing or know anyone else that might.

Q: NYU fall 2026 Indians - let’s connect — Hey everyone! I am an admitted student from Mumbai, India and will be joining NYU Stern in Fall 2026. I am currently in the process of applying for my visa and apartment hunting. I would prefer to find a roommate to stay with. If any female student is looking for a roommate, please DM me. We can figure out the location and logistics together. Looking forward to meeting you all!
A: I’m a fall 25 admit from Delhi. Feel free to connect.
A: Hi, I got into NYU Tandon, Happy to connect

Q: Looking for an apartment/place near NYU Tandon — Hey! I am a Vanderbilt student and will be doing an internship at NYU Tandon this summer, from Jun 2 to Aug 3. How does housing usually work? My budget is up to 3000 for the whole period, would that be enough? If anyone has any leads or knows someone, slide in my DMs! Thanks!
A: for that budget you can probably find a sublet or summer housing. nyu offers summer housing for interns through their housing department - check their website. also look at facebook groups like nyu housing or gypsy housing nyc. some students sublet their rooms for the summer while they're away. start looking early because june fills up fast. craigslist has options too just be careful with scams.

Q: Looking for roommate — Hi, I'm a current senior looking for a roommate after graduation. If anyone is interested in apartment hunting, please shoot me a DM.

Q: Looking for sublease summer session II — Hi Is anyone subleasing for like end of June-mid August, my budget is like under 3000. Please let me know!!
A: i've been there with summer housing. facebook housing groups for nyu are usually more active than reddit for sublets this specific. also check listings project and spareroom - both have short term filters. with that budget you should be fine for most shared places. just watch out for scams and never send money without seeing the place first

Q: ISO Summer Sublease in Lower Manhattan (READY TO SIGN ASAP FOR ~JUNE 1 MOVE IN) - We just lost our sublease, back to square one :)
A: that sucks about the sublease falling through. check the nyu housing facebook groups and the offcampus portal first - people post summer sublets daily. also try listing project and the nyu snapchat story. for lower manhattan near fidi you might find something in your budget if you go for a 3 or 4 person place. furnished is easier than unfurnished for summer interns. move fast cause june first is close.

Q: summer private room — Hi there, looking to sublease a private bedroom for the summer, June to August. Open to roommates looking for somewhere in Manhattan female roommates preferred.  budget is quite flexible! DM me if you have something

Q: No grade curve & in person for course retake — I have requested to take course remotely for retake saying financial burdens and hefty loan because rent is high. As for as final grade curve, prof says curve can’t happen due to fairness of other students so Idk what to do. This is for MS. One retake for that course is equivalent to an online MSCS at say like gatech so idk if it’s even worth it. Thoughts? Could I take leave from NYU, get a job then come back to finish or what?
A: Visa isn’t a issue since I’m a US CITIZEN. I’m curious how you reflected a leave of absence (which seems kinda wild for one course) on your resume?
A: that's a rough spot. i looked into leave of absence when rent spiked. you can take up to two years but check if your visa allows work. some people do leave, get a job, then finish part time. just know that interest on loans keeps growing. compare what gatech online would cost vs finishing fast at nyu. run the numbers on salary boost either way.

Q: NYU Masters Gown for Rent

Q: Selling grad tickets — Hey I’ve been planning on selling my grad tickets(two yankee stadium guest tickets) for a while now to save up for rent. DM if interested Will show proof and willing to meet up on campus in-person.

Q: Any Tall Alumni in NYC have their Grad robe and cap? — Looking for a used grad robe and cap for a tall person >6’2 for the commencement ceremony coming up. I’m willing to buy it off you or just rent it for a day if you wanna keep it for memories.

Q: Steinhardt MASTERS regalia needed for PICS — Helloooooo! I’m taking grad pics next week and realized the photoshoot is before cap and gown pick-up 🤦‍♀️. If anyone is/knows of any Steinhardt Masters students who will let me rent it from them plz let me knowwww!!!! I don’t need for graduation :)))))).

Q: Anyone looking for a roommate next year? — I was going to room with this guy but he ended up getting an apt with some friends and I’m lowkey too poor to even split the rent at that placeeee. If anyone was looking for a roommate for dorming next year lmk lol. I’m trying to live in one of those Double Studios in Carlyle but Broome also lowkey gives good vibes. If anyone’s interested, hmu!!

Q: Tisch Master's Cap & Gown for 5' [RENT OR BUY] — Hi! I unfortunately missed the order deadline for my cap and gown so I wanted to see if anyone had a cap/gown to rent or buy for someone that's 5'. Thank you!

Q: My first semester as a transfer and commuter student that works nearly full-time… — I will keep this brief since I am feeling the burnout and I want this to be a discussion. My commute to school is an hour each way—unfortunate, i know. I envy those that live on campus, but I cannot complain since my rent is within my means. most of my classes were asynchronous, with two in-persons. I have attended plenty events this semester and have made eboard to a few organizations. I am proud of myself for that. What I am not proud of was my lack of commitment to progress my professional network. Avoided/skipped networking events, I could’ve seen the career center more, connected more with people, etc, etc. I blame already having plans set up for the summer and just trying to socially adjust to my new environment. My goal for the fall semester: network, network, network. be proactive! it’ll be awkward but everything new can be at first. one foot in the door is better than never entering at all. For those of you transfer and/or commuter students, what is some critical advice you would give yourself or future students that you wish you would have known sooner? What I would suggest for virtual events is getting their contact information and, once you are in the city, reaching out to schedule coffee chats. For networking, you should have a set of questions ready that you can learn from. My go-to used to be: “What would you have done differently if you were in my position, knowing what you do now?” It always leads to an interesting conversation that highlights the contrast between their experience and your position.
A: Pick one campus day to stack two short coffee chats and follow up that night. I’ve used Articuler mostly to figure out who’s actually worth meeting before events, which made limited trips count.
A: i transferred too and commuted 45 mins - networking felt impossible at first. what worked for me was picking just 2 events per month and forcing myself to talk to one new person each time. also use linkedin to connect with classmates after group projects, it's lower pressure. the career center does quick 15 minute resume reviews that are worth it. you're already ahead by recognizing the gap, so one small step each week adds up
A: That is unfortunate. From personal experience, virtual events are fine, but you do not really connect with executives or peers that way. A live conversation with some canapés and a drink really makes the interaction much more pleasant. The most valuable connections I made were all in person—catching an executive alone or speaking with a peer.
A: that’s awesome! unfortunately i won’t be in the city this summer :( but i’m assuming there will be plenty of virtual events. how do you take advantage during the summer?
A: Don't wait until fall!!!  A ton of networking events happen during summer, and if you already live in the city it will be easier to manage attendance to these events with no academic commitments!

Q: Rent or borrow graduation gown — Hello! I'm a senior about to graduate and would rather rent or borrow a graduation gown than buy one. Let me know if you know where I can buy one or if you have one to borrow! I'm a 5'11" average built man btw
A: i did the same thing last year - buying a gown for one day feels ridiculous. check out the nyu free and for sale facebook group, people sell theirs for like $20 after graduation. also herff jones does rentals for about $40 if you want something guaranteed. amazon actually has cap and gown sets for under $30 that match nyu's colors if you search for 'nyu graduation gown' and read the reviews for sizing. just make sure you order the right length for 5'11 so the hem hits right. saved me a ton of money.

Q: undergrad cap and gown for rent/sale — hi, I am looking to buy/rent a cap and gown for commencement and graduation please! it’s too expensive for me to buy currently. please let me know, thank you!!!
A: Hi, just wondering if you still have your cap and gown? I’m 6’0 as well, and I’d like to buy!!
A: hi!! I dmed you :) super interested if it’s still available plz!! tysm :)
A: Yeah you are gonna have to message the other person. I’m 6’0 lol
A: thank you!! I did find one online but just the gown and not the cap

Q: Looking to rent or buy used Master's Gown — # Looking to rent or buy used Master's Gown hi! i'm willing to rent or buy a Master's regalia. If anyone has the gold MS hood that would be great; otherwise, just the gown itself is fine! I am looking for anyone around 5'2-5'4. I am 5'3 for reference.

Q: Looking to rent or buy used Master's Gown

Q: Looking to rent or buy used Master's Gown

Q: Masters student looking to rent a gown — Please dm if anyone is willing to rent out their cap, gown and tassel from last year
A: I will pay. Please dm me if anyone is willing to lent it. Thanks

Q: Masters student looking to rent a gown — Please dm if anyone is willing to rent out their cap, gown and tassel from last year

Q: Graduation Gown — Does anyone have a graduation gown I can borrow/rent? I don’t really want to purchase one :( I’m 6’3

Q: Gown and Cap for rental/sale — Hello! I forgot to order a gown and cap for the upcoming 2026 graduation. Does anyone have one that I could rent/buy off them? 🥹 For reference, I’m 5’1” so I would prefer an S or XS for size. Thank you!

Q: does anyone know where to rent MA graduation cap and gown? — i don’t want to pay $79 🥲 if a kind soul wouldn’t mind lend me theirs, i’ll buy you a coffee!!

Q: Rent a Masters cap and gown — Looking to rent/ borrow a Masters cap and gown in May for graduation! Don't want to buy a gown that I won't use again lol

Q: How do I rent a laptop overnight from Bobst? — I need a laptop that I can take home, and return the next day to take a test that uses the brightspace lockdown browser(respondus). Any idea what the process is to go about renting a computer? And does anyone know what computers are available to rent?

Q: Does anyone want my rent controlled apartment near central park? Its great for NYU students

Q: Planning to rent a studio apartment starting next fall. Any suggestions

Q: Where can I rent a DSLR camera? — I want to rent a DSLR camera to take photos. Since this isn't for a course and I'm not a Tisch  student, i'm not sure where or if I can rent a DSLR camera from campus. I was wondering if there's a way for me to rent one.

Q: Subleasing — Is anyone subletting their apartment for the summer? I would be open to paying your rent to stay in your place for June July and August up to when you need to come back for college

Q: NYU Tandon Accepted — Hi everyone! I was recently accepted into NYU Tandon for a master’s in computer science and wanted to get some perspectives on whether people think it’s worth the cost. I currently have a 5k per year scholarship, which brings the total tuition down by about 10k, and for living expenses I’m in a fortunate position where I already have housing and won’t be paying rent. I’m also waiting to hear back about the GEM Fellowship, which could significantly change the financial picture. I’d really appreciate hearing from anyone who’s been through the program or faced a similar decision, especially regarding ROI, job placement, and whether the cost felt justified in hindsight. Thank you in advance! cheers https://chat.whatsapp.com/FQR1PEUQbWP3YBEZ24ENUB You can ask here, there are a couple of seniors who can help you out.
A: hey would love to connect with you. i have same nyu tandon admit for fall 2026. international student. mscs
A: This was for grad school so I didn't submit an SAT though some people do submit a GRE though
A: I was surprised too I submitted it around mid November
A: Did you apply before December 1st? Suprised that theyre already releasing decisions

Q: Summer Rental of Room — Hi yall! I am looking for a room from late May to mid August as I will be interning in lower manhattan for the summer. I am currently a student at Cornell and I’m super tidy and organized. I’m also a friendly person and would preferably like to have other female roommates. I know it’s early but if anyone is looking to rent their room for the summer please feel free to lmk! My budget is $1600! If you believe this to be a mistake, please message the moderators for secondary review.
A: This post has been removed for being related to admissions or applications. We invite you to direct all questions regarding these topics to the megathread or the NYU admissions office, thanks!


## TOPIC: LEASE LEGAL

Q: International Transfer Housing — Hi everyone, just got accepted as a transfer for CAS last week, however I'm stressing with the housing so much. I applied already for the housing few days ago, but waiting till mid july, or possibly till august is such a tight timeline. Been looking for sub-lease/through the nyu off campus housing as well, don't seem to find too much luck there. Does international transfer likely secure a dorm? Any advice would be greatly appreciated. Thanks!

Q: NYU off campus Housing — looking for another student to sign a lease w me starting this summer

Q: How To Re-Do Housing Application? — My roommate accidentally submitted the housing application too early and now it's not letting them join my group because they can't go back and edit it. Is there anyway to edit the housing application or cancel it in order to re-do it (as opposed to completely cancelling it to live off campus)?
A: Yes you can cancel it to live off campus but you will not get the housing deposit back.

Q: NYU spring housing — I’m a spring transfer and looking for roommates and either on-campus or off-campus housing. If you’re interested or know someone who is, please reach out to me!

Q: NYU spring housing — I’m a spring transfer and looking for roommates and either on-campus or off-campus housing. If you’re interested or know someone who is, please reach out to me.
A: Hi, did you get an email about on campus housing yet

Q: Off campus housing — Incoming transfer student to NYU for the Spring. I’m on the waitlist for on campus housing but doesn’t seem like any spots will open up. Any tips for finding off campus housing? Seems like many sublets are for a full year… also is it risky to sign a lease with people you don’t know? Has anyone ever been scammed or anything before? NYU housing office recommend EHS student housing but also what I’ve read on Reddit about it seems pretty negative

Q: On campus housing or off campus (subletting)

Q: Looking for people to S u b l e t — Hi guys, I am looking to sublet my apartment over the summer. $2500/ month. Subletting one room in a two-room apartment. I am looking to sublet it from June 1st - End of August. If you are interested, please lmk!!! Also, if you know another place where I can post, plz lmk too!

Q: looking for friends to roam the city with after finals — i’m a junior leaving the country after the semester ends. Looking to make new friends and explore NYC while i’m still here! I’ve always wanted to go to the Met, JP Morgan headquarters, apartment from the tv series friends, basketball/baseball games, etc. If you know any interesting places around, please don’t hesitate to be my tour guide! Text me if you are interested. Much appreciated!

Q: Searching for apt/roommates — Hello, I know it's kinda last minute but I am looking for sublease/housing that starts July 1st. I am an incoming grad student at NYU and am quite and respectful. Let me know if you are looking for an extra roommate/subletter :-)

Q: Sublease: Private bedroom near Columbia / UWS — $1,450/mo, June–Aug 12, 2026, negotiable

Q: Sublease: Private bedroom near Columbia / UWS — $1,450/mo, June–Aug 12, 2026, negotiable

Q: studying abroad? need someone to sublease your place?

Q: Summer Sublease — Me and my best friend (both female) are looking for a sublease for the summer. If anyone is looking to sublease their place of know anyone who is pls lmk

Q: Looking for Summer Sublease Manhattan June 3-Aug 8

Q: summer sublease

Q: Subleasing at NYU - 05/29 to 06/28 — Hey guys, I'm a third year medical student looking to sublease near NYU's medical hospitals. Please lmk if anything is available. Thanks!

Q: how difficult is it to sublease in nyc — how difficult is it to sublease in nyc

Q: Looking for a roomate to sublease Union Square apt w 3 other NYU girls — Hi! I'm going abroad for the year and won't be staying in my room any longer. My roommates and are looking for another NYU student (preferably a girl) to take my place. The place is pretty big, laundry in unit, has a balcony, is fully furnished, and a spacious bathroom. It's a ten minute walk max from Washington Square. The room would be shared with one of the girl's - it is very large and easily fits two full/queen beds. If you are interested please reply/dm asap!!!!! Move in would be May or June (whatever is easiest for you)
A: 10 min walk from washington square with in unit laundry?? girl this is gonna be gone in 24 hours. I already have housing but I know like 3 people looking for summer sublets, can I share this with them?
A: thank you for all the tips!! i really appreciate it! hope you had a lovely time abroad
A: i went abroad last year and had to find someone for my spot too. what worked for me was posting in the nyu housing facebook groups and the class discords - got way more responses there than reddit tbh. also maybe add a photo or two of the shared room setup so people can see the layout. the location sounds great so i doubt you'll have trouble filling it once it gets closer to may.

Q: Summer Sublease june 6th-aug 8th

Q: Looking for a Sublease

Q: Looking to sublease this summer (June-Aug) for an internship — Hi everyone! Not sure if this is a good place to ask, but I'm an incoming summer intern looking for a sublet in Manhattan for the summer. Feel free to DM me with any resources or information, it would be super helpful in my search. For more details location wise I would prefer Upper East Side, but also open to Upper West Side, Midtown, or Downtown Manhattan. My internship dates are June 1st to August 7th, though I'm probably getting there a few days earlier. I'd prefer something under $3000, and would love a furnished place if possible, but open to discussion. Thanks in advance!

Q: Sublease for the summer

Q: Best place to find apartment sublease

Q: Sublease

Q: Summer 2026 Sublease?

Q: SUBLEASE — ✨ FEMALE SUBLEASE AVAILABLE – FOUND STUDY TURTLE BAY ✨ Midtown Manhattan | $1889/month Move-in: December 15 Shared room in a female unit at Found Study Turtle Bay. The building is in an amazing location, just steps from Grand Central Station and close to the 6, E, B, and D trains, making the commute super easy. The room is fully furnished, clean, and the building has great amenities, including security, laundry, and study areas. Perfect for a student or young professional looking to start the spring semester settled and stress-free. DM for photos and more details.

Q: Is it Hard to Find Fall Sublets? — Does anyone have any experience getting a sublet for just the Fall semester? I'm interested in moving off campus, but I'm scared I won't be able to find a place next year because I plan to study abroad next Spring, and so I'll be looking for a sublease for only the Fall semester. If anyone could share their experience/insight, that'd be appreciated.

Q: Find a place to sublease from Jan - May 2026 (Spring sem)

Q: Looking for a female spring semester sublease!! please DM for leads

Q: ISO sep-Dec sublease


## TOPIC: LANDLORD MGMT

Q: Incoming international transfer to CAS Math+CS — life at NYU and job outcomes? — Hey everyone, I just got into NYU CAS as a transfer for Fall 2026, joint Math and CS through Courant. I'm an international student and trying to figure out what NYU life is actually like before I commit. A few questions if anyone has time: **On being an international transfer:** * How did you find community as a transfer, especially without the freshman year dorm experience? * For internationals specifically, how's OGS (Office of Global Services)? Any visa/CPT/OPT horror stories, or is it smooth? * Housing as a transfer, is it actually doable through NYU or does everyone end up off-campus? **On academics at Courant:** * How demanding is the joint Math+CS major realistically? I've heard mixed things about the CS side being capacity-constrained. * Is faculty access actually possible or does the CAS/Courant size make it tough? * Anyone done the accelerated BA/MS pathway? Worth it? **On outcomes (the big one):** * For Math and CS grads, how's the job market been lately? I know 2026 has been rough for CS broadly. * For internationals specifically, how hard is it to find employers that sponsor H-1B? Do most people lean on Big Tech / quant firms/banks for sponsorship? * Courant has a rep in quant finance, does that actually translate for undergrads, or is it mostly a grad program thing? * Any sense of what % of math/CS grads end up in NYC vs elsewhere? **General vibe check:** * Coming from a big traditional campus (UMass), is the lack of a traditional college experience actually a big deal, or do you get used to it fast? * Anything you wish you knew before committing? Appreciate any honest takes, good or bad. I'm choosing between NYU and UMich right now and trying to make the call based on actual student experience, not just rankings. Thanks!
A: No. however tandon is more engineer heavy, not wall street so consider what job you want after college.
A: Math+CS and school. Does the BA/BS a big deal?
A: for what major? or the school in general
A: Would you say there is a difference between CAS and Tandon
A: outcomes are amazing. math and cs is a huge pipeline to wall street finance, as long as you network correctly
A: How strong are the outcomes would you say? Here a big chunk of grads end up unemployed and go for grad school again. And do you think it is easy to get research jobs on campus or courant? I really wanna go for the O1 and am working in research here rn.
A: courant math+cs is no joke but the quant rep does trickle down to undergrads if you network hard. the bigger issue for internationals is the h1b lottery not just finding sponsorship - even if a firm wants you it's a coin flip. most international math/cs grads i know ended up in quant dev or swe at banks because those firms have more visa bandwidth. nyc vs elsewhere honestly depends on who sponsors you. the lack of campus is real but you trade it for actual city life. just know that ogs is slow and you have to stay on top of every cpt/opt deadline yourself.

Q: Study Abroad Housing Question — I plan on studying abroad in the Spring 2027 semester somewhere in Europe (not totally sure yet) however from what I've seen, it is a requirement to live in NYU housing, which I don't really want to do since some of my friends will be studying abroad with their own apartment and I'd rather live with them. My question is how exactly does NYU even know if I'm living in their housing? Do they check? Has anybody else just ignored the housing and not got caught? Would they really care if I stayed somewhere else for most days of the week?
A: I studied abroad in Israel, and while it can be challenging, it's a great experience. You'll be living with fellow students from your program. Know who your advisor is, as he/she will be in the same dorm, but no one checks if you're in your room. Building a good relationship with them and asking for exceptions can be helpful.
A: i looked into this before and NYU does actually check through program coordinators. they take attendance at housing check-ins and residency life gets notified if you skip their assignments. worst case they can pull you from the program or withhold credit. some people split time but if you're fully off their radar it gets risky. your safer bet is finding friends also in nyu housing nearby or just sucking it up for one semester.
A: You should apply for an exception. More reasonable than paying for a dorm and then not using it. When I was in Berlin there were a few people who had gotten exceptions.


## TOPIC: ROOMMATES

Q: NYU Transfer Housing — I’m going to NYU this upcoming fall as a junior transfer student and have no friends nor family there🥲🥲 Is it likely to get housing if I applied earlier on? Or do transfers usually have to find an off-campus apartment? Pls lmk ur advice & experiences!!
A: Also a transfer junior... and yea I do not know anyone in NYC either. I think most likely transfers have to do off campus housing. I have no advice lol but I'm in the same boat
A: i transferred in as a junior too and honestly housing depends on when you applied. earlier applications usually get something but transfers often end up in off campus apartments anyway. the housing portal will tell you your spot on the waitlist if there is one. for meeting people join a few club discords before the semester starts that saved me my first week. you will find your people just gotta put yourself out there during welcome week.
A: omg hi again!! have u found any potential roommates yet?
A: I’m also a transfer student waiting to hear back about housing

Q: Looking for Roommates for an Apartment — Hello, I am a sophomore transferring to NYU for Econ and Math, and I'm looking for some roommates to get an apartment with for next year. Lmk if you are interested, shoot me a dm. Thanks!

Q: Fall roommates — Trying to find roommates for an apartment this fall. Lmk if you’re down!


## TOPIC: COMMUTE TRANSIT

Q: CATSITTING (FREE) — Anybody in the NYC area want to house sit my cat (free)? •	Playful •	Affectionate •	Well-behaved •	Litter box trained •	Litter box and food will be provided for the week Requirements: •	Must be able to say with you •	Ideally lives in off-campus housing •	Preferably has experience with or owns cats
A: heyyy! i also brought my cat! if you want to do cat sitting exchange that would be good :) some days i need a cat sitter to ! would love to
A: When are you free to meet her we live in dorms btw
A: We’re not caring for your ugly ass cat for free bro

Q: Summer housing/food support on campus? — Hey guys, I’m an international senior student. My family just went through a financial crisis and couldn’t provide for me. I lost my apartment days ago and I want to ask if NYU provides free housing options during the summer. And what does the meal swipes work during the summer? Do we still have the ‘swipe it forward options? Need Help!
A: I’m sorry you’re dealing with this, and the fastest path is to treat it as an emergency support case with NYU, not a normal housing question. When I saw someone go through this, they had to contact StudentLink, the Dean of Students, residential life, and financial aid the same day and use the words urgent housing insecurity and food insecurity. Ask specifically about emergency housing, emergency funding, summer dining access, Swipe It Forward availability, and any short-term international student support. If you have a school advisor or department admin, email them too, because they can sometimes push the case internally. Keep everything in writing and do not wait for one office to reply before contacting the next one.
A: Contact the center for student life. At least when I was there, they handled food insecurity and the courtesy meal swipes

Q: making friends as a commuter — So i’m an incoming freshman for NYU class of 2030 and i’m going to be a commuter student my apartment is only like 7 minutes away from nyu campus but i was wondering how much more difficult it would be for me to make friends?
A: thank youu i’ll definitely stay on campus later especially since my apartment isn’t very far away are there any clubs you recommend joining?
A: i commuted my first year too, about 15 mins away. honestly you just have to be intentional about staying on campus longer. join a club or two that meets later, hang in the lounge between classes, and don't run home right after your last class. what helped me was keeping a small bag with snacks and a phone charger so i had no excuse to leave early. you got this.
A: 7 minutes is closer than most dorm buildings you'll be fine


## TOPIC: SAFETY

Q: I Think Someone Took My Teal Suitcase In Coral on 5/15/26 — Hi! I was moving into Coral Towers last Friday (5/15), and had arrived in an Uber with a bunch of luggage and boxes at about 5:00 PM. All of my stuff was on the street, so I moved my luggage to the lobby and went to get a blue bin, so I could take my things upstairs to my apartment. Several people were moving out of the building as I was moving in, and the lobby was filled with other luggage, boxes, etc. I got everything up to my apartment successfully between 5:00 PM and 5:40 PM, ***except*** **a teal suitcase with an orange tag on it**. IIt was full of all my favorite books, about $300 worth of them. I loved them a lot. I had to go to work, so I didn't realize my suitcase was missing until 6 AM the next day when I woke up. I asked Campus Safety, the Resource Center, and the donation bin people; they all seem to think someone might've taken it accidentally, thinking the suitcase was theirs. Was anyone moving out of Coral that day/did anyone take the suitcase?


## TOPIC: PROCESS TIPS

Q: Advice on finding housing & joining musical communities? — Hey! I’m committed to NYU Steinhardt’s MM composition/songwriting starting this fall (hmu if you’re in the same program 🕺🏻), and I’d love to hear more about the city and its community :)) As I’m not sure if I’ll get an on-campus graduate housing, what are some good locations for off-campus housing, and howwhere would one find a good listing? Also, as a musician and composer I’d love to get involved in bands, music-related opportunities, etc. How should I go about finding them? Thanks!!


## TOPIC: GENERAL

Q: Tandon Transfer Off Campus Housing — Hi guys I’m an incoming sophomore transferring into NYU Tandon and was wondering what are the most common off campus housing locations for students as on campus housing is very unlikely for transfers.

Q: #Urgent Off Campus Housing & Financial Aid

Q: nyu spring 2026 transfer — hows the housing situation if you got admitted to nyu as a spring transfer? do they usually offer dorms or do i have to look for off campus housing?

Q: NYUCD Dental Hygiene - Needing to find off-campus housing to attend — Hi!! I am hoping to attend NYU this spring as a student in the Fast Track AAS Dental Hyguene program, however NYU doesn’t offer dorms for this program so I am needing to find my own housing, I don’t have any friends/family in NY, any help is appreciated🫶🏼

Q: how likely are we to get our refund by august 24th — i read that refunds are typically disbursed 10 days before classes begin and that seems to be aug 24th… im an out of state grad student arriving to nyc on the 24th and i have about $15k in a refund that’s supposed to be going toward housing…. pretty worried bc i had been in contact with housing all summer and they told me i’d receive an assignment by end of july/early aug… 3 weeks ago when i called they told me i might as well look for off campus housing because they were unsure if there empty spots were still empty… :/ i leave this sunday for the city!! so i’m again pretty worried. i reached out to financial aid and no one answered (ofc) so i sent an email. any thoughts or ideas? 😭🙏
A: Looks like they started 0.00 out the balance! I just checked my balance it should be pushed out officially Monday :)
A: i did and it’s only 2500! 😭i’m not sure how that’s supposed to help oos/intl students fully settle into off-campus housing
A: They have an advance refund form you can ask the Bursar for if you’re worried about getting it on time. Call or email them!
A: My advisor always told me that a refund over $10k doesnt go through because its just not possible
A: I’m in the same boat woah! lol I have 16k refund too I told my apartment that we should push for a move in date of Sept 8th because I was scared it might not actually come the Monday!
A: Prob on Monday and then depend on your bank

Q: Cleaning services — Hello! We are students at NYU and we’re wondering if anyone is looking for cleaning services (dusting, decluttering, kitchen & bathroom clean, sweep & mop, laundry & fold). We charge $45 an hour. For reference a two bedroom apartment deep clean took us 3.5 hours, $140 total. If interested, reach out to rmr9482@nyu.edu or ecw9587@nyu.edu.

Q: I will pay $10 for a working rice cooker. — What the title says. If you're moving out and was going to get rid of your rice cooker, I'll pay $10 cash to take it off your hands for you. Must be working. Hand-off anytime tomorrow (5/12) at any Manhattan dorm or other apartment in the NYU area. DM me!!!!!!!

Q: SPACIOUS 1 BED/ 1 BATH APARTMENT IN LOWER MANHATTAN

Q: If you've ever filed a tax return, how did you fit your NYU apartment number? — I'm trying to file my tax returns now before the deadline, and I got some income from a New York company while I stayed at NYU over the summer. Specifically, I was in Lafayette Hall, but I do not know if I need to omit LA on the tax return or omit the letter or the number after that. For example, let's come up with a random room like LA-0645B-2. How would I enter this? Yeah, this is my first time XD
A: Thank you so much. But it looks like I can only put 5 characters.
A: i feel you on this - tax forms get weird with dorm addresses. the IRS only cares about the numeric part that identifies your specific unit. for BA-0645B-2, you'd put 0645B-2 in the apartment field or second address line. keep the letters if they're part of the unit identifier. the first two letters like BA are just building codes NYU uses internally. tax people just need enough to route mail to your actual door. you're overthinking it a bit but that's normal for first time filing.